Project Gutenberg’s A Treatise of Probability, by John Maynard Keynes

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.
You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

Title: A Treatise of Probability

Author: John Maynard Keynes

Release Date: February 9, 2014 [EBook #32625]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A TREATISE OF PROBABILITY ***

Produced by Ralph Janke, Andrew D. Hwang, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net. (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive.)

transcriber’s note

Minor typographical corrections and presentational changes
have been made without comment. Typographical corrections
and regularizations of hyphenation are documented in the
LATEXsource ﬁle.
PDF bookmarks are provided for navigation to individual
sections.
This PDF ﬁle is formatted for screen viewing, but may be easily
formatted for printing. Please consult the preamble of the
LATEX source ﬁle for instructions.

BY THE SAME AUTHOR

INDIAN CURRENCY AND FINANCE

8vo. Pp. viii + 263. 1913.

7s. 6d. net.

THE ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES

OF THE PEACE

8vo. Pp. vii + 279. 1919.

8s. 6d. net.

A TREATISE ON PROBABILITY

MACMILLAN AND CO., Limited

LONDON · BOMBAY · CALCUTTA · MADRAS

MELBOURNE

THE MACMILLAN COMPANY
NEW YORK · BOSTON · CHICAGO

DALLAS · SAN FRANCISCO

THE MACMILLAN CO. OF CANADA, Ltd.

TORONTO

A TREATISE

ON PROBABILITY

BY

JOHN MAYNARD KEYNES

FELLOW OF KING’S COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE

MACMILLAN AND CO., LIMITED
ST. MARTIN’S STREET, LONDON



PREFACE

The subject matter of this book was ﬁrst broached in the brain
of Leibniz, who, in the dissertation, written in his twenty-third year,
on the mode of electing the kings of Poland, conceived of Probability
as a branch of Logic. A few years before, “un problème,”
in the
words of Poisson, “proposé à un austère janséniste par un homme du
monde, a été l’origine du calcul des probabilitiés.” In the intervening
centuries the algebraical exercises, in which the Chevalier de la Méré
interested Pascal, have so far predominated in the learned world over
the profounder enquiries of the philosopher into those processes of
human faculty which, by determining reasonable preference, guide our
choice, that Probability is oftener reckoned with Mathematics than
with Logic. There is much here, therefore, which is novel and, being
novel, unsifted, inaccurate, or deﬁcient.
I propound my systematic
conception of this subject for criticism and enlargement at the hand
of others, doubtful whether I myself am likely to get much further,
by waiting longer, with a work, which, beginning as a Fellowship
Dissertation, and interrupted by the war, has already extended over
many years.

It may be perceived that I have been much inﬂuenced by W. E.
Johnson, G. E. Moore, and Bertrand Russell, that is to say by
Cambridge, which, with great debts to the writers of Continental
Europe, yet continues in direct succession the English tradition of
Locke and Berkeley and Hume, of Mill and Sidgwick, who, in spite of
their divergences of doctrine, are united in a preference for what is
matter of fact, and have conceived their subject as a branch rather of
science than of the creative imagination, prose writers, hoping to be
understood.

J. M. KEYNES.

King’s College, Cambridge,

May 1, 1920.

v

CONTENTS

PART I

fundamental ideas

CHAPTER I

The Meaning of Probability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

page
2

CHAPTER II

Probability in Relation to the Theory of Knowledge

9

The Measurement of Probabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

20

CHAPTER III

The Principle of Indifference. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

44

CHAPTER IV

Other Methods of Determining Probabilities . . . . . . . . .

71

CHAPTER V

vi

CONTENTS

CHAPTER VI

The Weight of Arguments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

vii

page
78

CHAPTER VII

Historical Retrospect . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

87

The Frequency Theory of Probability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102

CHAPTER VIII

The Constructive Theory of Part I. Summarized. . . . . . 123

CHAPTER IX

PART II

fundamental theorems

CHAPTER X

Introductory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 126

CHAPTER XI

The Theory of Groups, with special reference to
Logical Consistence, Inference, and Logical Pri-
ority . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 135

CHAPTER XII

The Definitions and Axioms of Inference and Proba-

bility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 146

A TREATISE ON PROBABILITY

viii

CHAPTER XIII

page
The Fundamental Theorems of Necessary Inference . 153

CHAPTER XIV

The Fundamental Theorems of Probable Inference . . 161

CHAPTER XV

Numerical Measurement and Approximation of Prob-

abilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 180

CHAPTER XVI

Observations on the Theorems of Chapter XIV. and

their Developments, including Testimony . . . . . . . . . 188

CHAPTER XVII

Some Problems in Inverse Probability,

including

Averages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 214

PART III

induction and analogy

CHAPTER XVIII

Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 250

The Nature of Argument by Analogy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 256

CHAPTER XIX

CONTENTS

CHAPTER XX

ix

page

The Value of Multiplication of Instances, or Pure

Induction. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 269

CHAPTER XXI

The Nature of Inductive Argument Continued. . . . . . . . 279

CHAPTER XXII

The Justification of these Methods. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 289

CHAPTER XXIII

Some Historical Notes on Induction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 305

Notes on Part III . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 315

PART IV

some philosophical applications of probability

CHAPTER XXIV

The Meanings of Objective Chance, and of Random-

ness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 321

CHAPTER XXV

Some Problems arising out of the Discussion of

Chance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 335

A TREATISE ON PROBABILITY

x

CHAPTER XXVI

page
The Application of Probability to Conduct . . . . . . . . . . . 351

PART V

the foundations of statistical inference

CHAPTER XXVII

The Nature of Statistical Inference. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 371

CHAPTER XXVIII

The Law of Great Numbers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 376

CHAPTER XXIX

The Use of à priori Probabilities for the Predic-
tion of Statistical Frequency—the Theorems of
Bernoulli, Poisson, and Tchebycheff. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 382

CHAPTER XXX

The Mathematical use of Statistical Frequencies for
the Determination of Probability à posteriori—the
Methods of Laplace . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 418

The Inversion of Bernoulli’s Theorem. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 438

CHAPTER XXXI

CONTENTS

xi

CHAPTER XXXII

The Inductive use of Statistical Frequencies for
the Determination of Probability à posteriori—the
Methods of Lexis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 446

page

CHAPTER XXXIII

Outline of a Constructive Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 464

PART I

fundamental ideas

CHAPTER I

the meaning of probability

“J’ai dit plus d’une fois qu’il faudrait une nouvelle espèce de logique, qui

traiteroit des degrés de Probabilité.”—Leibniz.

1.

Part of our knowledge we obtain direct; and part by
argument. The Theory of Probability is concerned with that part
which we obtain by argument, and it treats of the diﬀerent degrees in
which the results so obtained are conclusive or inconclusive.

In most branches of academic logic, such as the theory of the
syllogism or the geometry of ideal space, all the arguments aim at
demonstrative certainty. They claim to be conclusive. But many other
arguments are rational and claim some weight without pretending to
be certain. In Metaphysics, in Science, and in Conduct, most of the
arguments, upon which we habitually base our rational beliefs, are
admitted to be inconclusive in a greater or less degree. Thus for a
philosophical treatment of these branches of knowledge, the study of
probability is required.

The course which the history of thought has led Logic to follow
has encouraged the view that doubtful arguments are not within
its scope. But in the actual exercise of reason we do not wait on
certainty, or doom it irrational to depend on a doubtful argument. If
logic investigates the general principles of valid thought, the study of
arguments, to which it is rational to attach some weight, is as much
a part of it as the study of those which are demonstrative.

2. The terms certain and probable describe the various degrees
of rational belief about a proposition which diﬀerent amounts of
knowledge authorise us to entertain. All propositions are true or false,
but the knowledge we have of them depends on our circumstances;
and while it is often convenient to speak of propositions as certain or
probable, this expresses strictly a relationship in which they stand to
a corpus of knowledge, actual or hypothetical, and not a characteristic

2

ch. i

FUNDAMENTAL IDEAS

3

of the propositions in themselves. A proposition is capable at the
same time of varying degrees of this relationship, depending upon the
knowledge to which it is related, so that it is without signiﬁcance to
call a proposition probable unless we specify the knowledge to which
we are relating it.

To this extent, therefore, probability may be called subjective.
But in the sense important to logic, probability is not subjective. It
is not, that is to say, subject to human caprice. A proposition is not
probable because we think it so. When once the facts are given which
determine our knowledge, what is probable or improbable in these
circumstances has been ﬁxed objectively, and is independent of our
opinion. The Theory of Probability is logical, therefore, because it is
concerned with the degree of belief which it is rational to entertain in
given conditions, and not merely with the actual beliefs of particular
individuals, which may or may not be rational.

Given the body of direct knowledge which constitutes our ultimate
premisses, this theory tells us what further rational beliefs, certain or
probable, can be derived by valid argument from our direct knowledge.
This involves purely logical relations between the propositions which
embody our direct knowledge and the propositions about which we
seek indirect knowledge. What particular propositions we select as
the premisses of our argument naturally depends on subjective factors
peculiar to ourselves; but the relations, in which other propositions
stand to these, and which entitle us to probable beliefs, are objective
and logical.

3. Let our premisses consist of any set of propositions h, and our
conclusion consist of any set of propositions a, then, if a knowledge
of h justiﬁes a rational belief in a of degree α, we say that there is a
probability-relation of degree α between a and h.∗

In ordinary speech we often describe the conclusion as being
doubtful, uncertain, or only probable. But, strictly, these terms

∗This will be written a/h = α.

pt. i

A TREATISE ON PROBABILITY

4

ought to be applied, either to the degree of our rational belief
in
the conclusion, or to the relation or argument between two sets
of propositions, knowledge of which would aﬀord grounds for a
corresponding degree of rational belief.∗

4. With the term “event,” which has taken hitherto so important
a place in the phraseology of the subject, I shall dispense altogether.†
Writers on Probability have generally dealt with what they term the
“happening” of “events.”
In the problems which they ﬁrst studied
this did not involve much departure from common usage. But these
expressions are now used in a way which is vague and ambiguous;
and it will be more than a verbal improvement to discuss the truth
and the probability of propositions instead of the occurrence and the
probability of events.‡

5. These general ideas are not likely to provoke much criticism.
In the ordinary course of thought and argument, we are constantly
assuming that knowledge of one statement, while not proving the
truth of a second, yields nevertheless some ground for believing it.
We assert that we ought on the evidence to prefer such and such
a belief. We claim rational grounds for assertions which are not
conclusively demonstrated. We allow, in fact, that statements may
be unproved, without,
for that reason, being unfounded. And it
does not seem on reﬂection that the information we convey by these
expressions is wholly subjective. When we argue that Darwin gives
valid grounds for our accepting his theory of natural selection, we do
not simply mean that we are psychologically inclined to agree with

∗See also Chapter II. § 5.
†Except in those chapters (Chap. XVII., for example) where I am dealing

chieﬂy with the work of others.

‡The ﬁrst writer I know of to notice this was Ancillon in Doutes sur les
bases du calcul des probabilités (1794):
“Dire qu’un fait passé, présent ou à
venir est probable, c’est dire qu’une proposition est probable.” The point was
emphasised by Boole, Laws of Thought, pp. 7 and 167.
See also Czuber,
i. p. 5, and Stumpf, Über den Begriﬀ der
Wahrscheinlichkeitsrechnung, vol.
mathematischen Wahrscheinlichkeit.

ch. i

FUNDAMENTAL IDEAS

5

6.

him; it is certain that we also intend to convey our belief that we are
acting rationally in regarding his theory as probable. We believe that
there is some real objective relation between Darwin’s evidence and
his conclusions, which is independent of the mere fact of our belief,
and which is just as real and objective, though of a diﬀerent degree,
as that which would exist if the argument were as demonstrative as
a syllogism. We are claiming, in fact, to cognise correctly a logical
connection between one set of propositions which we call our evidence
and which we suppose ourselves to know, and another set which we
call our conclusions, and to which we attach more or less weight
according to the grounds supplied by the ﬁrst.
It is this type of
objective relation between sets of propositions—the type which we
claim to be correctly perceiving when we make such assertions as
these—to which the reader’s attention must be directed.

It is not straining the use of words to speak of this as the
relation of probability. It is true that mathematicians have employed
the term in a narrower sense;
for they have often conﬁned it to
the limited class of instances in which the relation is adapted to an
algebraical treatment. But in common usage the word has never
received this limitation.

Students of probability in the sense which is meant by the authors
of typical treatises on Wahrscheinlichkeitsrechnung or Calcul des
probabilités, will ﬁnd that I do eventually reach topics with which
they are familiar. But in making a serious attempt to deal with
the fundamental diﬃculties with which all students of mathematical
probabilities have met and which are notoriously unsolved, we must
begin at the beginning (or almost at the beginning) and treat our
subject widely. As soon as mathematical probability ceases to be
the merest algebra or pretends to guide our decisions, it immediately
meets with problems against which its own weapons are quite
powerless. And even if we wish later on to use probability in a narrow
sense, it will be well to know ﬁrst what it means in the widest.

7.

Between two sets of propositions, therefore, there exists

pt. i

A TREATISE ON PROBABILITY

6

a relation, in virtue of which, if we know the ﬁrst, we can attach
to the latter some degree of rational belief. This relation is the
subject-matter of the logic of probability.

A great deal of confusion and error has arisen out of a failure to
take due account of this relational aspect of probability. From the
premisses “a implies b” and “a is true,” we can conclude something
about b—namely that b is true—which does not involve a. But, if a
is so related to b, that a knowledge of it renders a probable belief in b
rational, we cannot conclude anything whatever about b which has
not reference to a; and it is not true that every set of self-consistent
premisses which includes a has this same relation to b. It is as useless,
therefore, to say “b is probable” as it would be to say “b is equal,”
or “b is greater than,” and as unwarranted to conclude that, because
a makes b probable, therefore a and c together make b probable, as
to argue that because a is less than b, therefore a and c together are
less than b.

Thus, when in ordinary speech we name some opinion as probable
without further qualiﬁcation, the phrase is generally elliptical. We
mean that it is probable when certain considerations,
implicitly or
explicitly present to our minds at the moment, are taken into account.
We use the word for the sake of shortness, just as we speak of a place
as being three miles distant, when we mean three miles distant from
where we are then situated, or from some starting-point to which we
tacitly refer. No proposition is in itself either probable or improbable,
just as no place can be intrinsically distant; and the probability of
the same statement varies with the evidence presented, which is, as
it were, its origin of reference. We may ﬁx our attention on our own
knowledge and, treating this as our origin, consider the probabilities
of all other suppositions,—according to the usual practice which leads
to the elliptical form of common speech; or we may, equally well, ﬁx it
on a proposed conclusion and consider what degree of probability this
would derive from various sets of assumptions, which might constitute
the corpus of knowledge of ourselves or others, or which are merely

ch. i

FUNDAMENTAL IDEAS

7

hypotheses.

Reﬂection will show that this account harmonises with familiar
experience. There is nothing novel
in the supposition that the
probability of a theory turns upon the evidence by which it is
supported; and it is common to assert that an opinion was probable
on the evidence at ﬁrst to hand, but on further information was
untenable.
As our knowledge or our hypothesis changes, our
conclusions have new probabilities, not in themselves, but relatively
to these new premisses. New logical relations have now become
important, namely those between the conclusions which we are
investigating and our new assumptions; but the old relations between
the conclusions and the former assumptions still exist and are just
as real as these new ones.
It would be as absurd to deny that an
opinion was probable, when at a later stage certain objections have
come to light, as to deny, when we have reached our destination, that
it was ever three miles distant; and the opinion still is probable in
relation to the old hypotheses, just as the destination is still three
miles distant from our starting-point.

8. A deﬁnition of probability is not possible, unless it contents us
to deﬁne degrees of the probability-relation by reference to degrees of
rational belief. We cannot analyse the probability-relation in terms of
simpler ideas. As soon as we have passed from the logic of implication
and the categories of truth and falsehood to the logic of probability
and the categories of knowledge, ignorance, and rational belief, we
are paying attention to a new logical relation in which, although it
is logical, we were not previously interested, and which cannot be
explained or deﬁned in terms of our previous notions.

This opinion is, from the nature of the case, incapable of positive
proof. The presumption in its favour must arise partly out of our
failure to ﬁnd a deﬁnition, and partly because the notion presents
itself to the mind as something new and independent. If the statement
that an opinion was probable on the evidence at ﬁrst to hand, but
became untenable on further information, is not solely concerned with

pt. i

A TREATISE ON PROBABILITY

8

psychological belief, I do not know how the element of logical doubt
is to be deﬁned, or how its substance is to be stated, in terms of the
other indeﬁnables of formal logic. The attempts at deﬁnition, which
have been made hitherto, will be criticised in later chapters. I do not
believe that any of them accurately represent that particular logical
relation which we have in our minds when we speak of the probability
of an argument.

logic can easily be carried too far.

In the great majority of cases the term “probable” seems to be
used consistently by diﬀerent persons to describe the same concept.
Diﬀerences of opinion have not been due,
I think, to a radical
ambiguity of language. In any case a desire to reduce the indeﬁnables
of
Even if a deﬁnition is
discoverable in the end, there is no harm in postponing it until our
enquiry into the object of deﬁnition is far advanced.
In the case of
“probability” the object before the mind is so familiar that the danger
of misdescribing its qualities through lack of a deﬁnition is less than if
it were a highly abstract entity far removed from the normal channels
of thought.

9.

This chapter has served brieﬂy to indicate, though not
to deﬁne, the subject matter of the book.
Its object has been
to emphasise the existence of a logical relation between two sets of
propositions in cases where it is not possible to argue demonstratively
from one to the other. This is a contention of a most fundamental
character.
It is not entirely novel, but has seldom received due
emphasis, is often overlooked, and sometimes denied. The view, that
probability arises out of the existence of a speciﬁc relation between
premiss and conclusion, depends for its acceptance upon a reﬂective
judgment on the true character of the concept. It will be our object
to discuss, under the title of Probability, the principal properties of
this relation. First, however, we must digress in order to consider
brieﬂy what we mean by knowledge, rational belief, and argument.

CHAPTER II

probability in relation to the theory of

knowledge

1.

I do not wish to become involved in questions of epistemology
to which I do not know the answer; and I am anxious to reach as
soon as possible the particular part of philosophy or logic which is the
subject of this book. But some explanation is necessary if the reader
is to be put in a position to understand the point of view from which
the author sets out; I will, therefore, expand some part of what has
been outlined or assumed in the ﬁrst chapter.

2.

There is, ﬁrst of all, the distinction between that part of
our belief which is rational and that part which is not.
If a man
believes something for a reason which is preposterous or for no reason
at all, and what he believes turns out to be true for some reason not
known to him, he cannot be said to believe it rationally, although he
believes it and it is in fact true. On the other hand, a man may
rationally believe a proposition to be probable, when it is in fact false.
The distinction between rational belief and mere belief, therefore, is
not the same as the distinction between true beliefs and false beliefs.
The highest degree of rational belief, which is termed certain rational
belief, corresponds to knowledge. We may be said to know a thing
when we have a certain rational belief in it, and vice versa. For
reasons which will appear from our account of probable degrees of
rational belief in the following paragraph, it is preferable to regard
knowledge as fundamental and to deﬁne rational belief by reference
to it.

3. We come next to the distinction between that part of our
rational belief which is certain and that part which is only probable.
Belief, whether rational or not,
is capable of degree. The highest
degree of rational belief, or rational certainty of belief, and its relation
to knowledge have been introduced above. What, however,
is the

9

pt. i

A TREATISE ON PROBABILITY

10

4.

relation to knowledge of probable degrees of rational belief?

The proposition (say, q) that we know in this case is not the
same as the proposition (say, p) in which we have a probable degree
(say, α) of rational belief.
If the evidence upon which we base our
belief is h, then what we know, namely q, is that the proposition p
bears the probability-relation of degree α to the set of propositions h;
and this knowledge of ours justiﬁes us in a rational belief of degree α
in the proposition p.
It will be convenient to call propositions such
as p, which do not contain assertions about probability-relations,
“primary propositions”; and propositions such as q, which assert the
existence of a probability-relation, “secondary propositions.”∗

Thus knowledge of a proposition always corresponds to
certainty of rational belief in it and at the same time to actual truth
in the proposition itself. We cannot know a proposition unless it is
in fact true. A probable degree of rational belief in a proposition,
on the other hand, arises out of knowledge of some corresponding
secondary proposition. A man may rationally believe a proposition to
be probable when it is in fact false, if the secondary proposition on
which he depends is true and certain; while a man cannot rationally
believe a proposition to be probable even when it is in fact true, if
the secondary proposition on which he depends is not true. Thus
rational belief of whatever degree can only arise out of knowledge,
although the knowledge may be of a proposition secondary, in the
above sense, to the proposition in which the rational degree of belief
is entertained.

5.

At this point it is desirable to colligate the three senses in
which the term probability has been so far employed.
In its most
fundamental sense, I think, it refers to the logical relation between
two sets of propositions, which in § 4 of Chapter I. I have termed the
probability-relation. It is with this that I shall be mainly concerned
in the greater part of this Treatise. Derivative from this sense, we

∗This classiﬁcation of “primary” and “secondary” propositions was suggested

to me by Mr. W. E. Johnson.

ch. ii

FUNDAMENTAL IDEAS

11

have the sense in which, as above, the term probable is applied to
the degrees of rational belief arising out of knowledge of secondary
propositions which assert the existence of probability-relations in the
fundamental logical sense. Further it is often convenient, and not
necessarily misleading, to apply the term probable to the proposition
which is the object of the probable degree of rational belief, and
which bears the probability-relation in question to the propositions
comprising the evidence.

6.

I turn now to the distinction between direct and indirect
knowledge—between that part of our rational belief which we know
directly and that part which we know by argument.

We start from things, of various classes, with which we have,
what I choose to call without reference to other uses of this term,
direct acquaintance. Acquaintance with such things does not in itself
constitute knowledge, although knowledge arises out of acquaintance
with them. The most important classes of things with which we
have direct acquaintance are our own sensations, which we may be
said to experience, the ideas or meanings, about which we have
thoughts and which we may be said to understand, and facts or
characteristics or relations of sense-data or meanings, which we may
be said to perceive;—experience, understanding, and perception being
three forms of direct acquaintance.

The objects of knowledge and belief—as opposed to the objects
of direct acquaintance which I term sensations, meanings, and
perceptions—I shall term propositions.

Now our knowledge of propositions seems to be obtained in
two ways:
directly, as the result of contemplating the objects
of acquaintance; and indirectly, by argument, through perceiving
the probability-relation of the proposition, about which we seek
knowledge, to other propositions.
In the second case, at any rate
at ﬁrst, what we know is not the proposition itself but a secondary
proposition involving it. When we know a secondary proposition
involving the proposition p as subject, we may be said to have indirect

pt. i

A TREATISE ON PROBABILITY

12

knowledge about p.

Indirect knowledge about p may in suitable conditions lead to
rational belief in p of an appropriate degree. If this degree is that of
certainty, then we have not merely indirect knowledge about p, but
indirect knowledge of p.

7. Let us take examples of direct knowledge. From acquaintance
with a sensation of yellow I can pass directly to a knowledge of the
proposition “I have a sensation of yellow.” From acquaintance with
a sensation of yellow and with the meanings of “yellow,”
“colour,”
“existence,”
I may be able to pass to a direct knowledge of the
propositions “I understand the meaning of yellow,” “my sensation of
yellow exists,” “yellow is a colour.” Thus, by some mental process
of which it is diﬃcult to give an account, we are able to pass from
direct acquaintance with things to a knowledge of propositions about
the things of which we have sensations or understand the meaning.

Next, by the contemplation of propositions of which we have direct
knowledge, we are able to pass indirectly to knowledge of or about
other propositions. The mental process by which we pass from direct
knowledge to indirect knowledge is in some cases and in some degree
capable of analysis. We pass from a knowledge of the proposition a to
a knowledge about the proposition b by perceiving a logical relation
between them. With this logical relation we have direct acquaintance.
The logic of knowledge is mainly occupied with a study of the logical
relations, direct acquaintance with which permits direct knowledge
of the secondary proposition asserting the probability-relation, and
so to indirect knowledge about, and in some cases of, the primary
proposition.

It is not always possible, however, to analyse the mental process
in the case of indirect knowledge, or to say by the perception of what
logical relation we have passed from the knowledge of one proposition
to knowledge about another. But although in some cases we seem to
pass directly from one proposition to another, I am inclined to believe
that in all legitimate transitions of this kind some logical relation

ch. ii

FUNDAMENTAL IDEAS

13

of the proper kind must exist between the propositions, even when
we are not explicitly aware of it. In any case, whenever we pass to
knowledge about one proposition by the contemplation of it in relation
to another proposition of which we have knowledge—even when the
process is unanalysable—I call it an argument. The knowledge, such
as we have in ordinary thought by passing from one proposition to
another without being able to say what logical relations, if any, we
have perceived between them, may be termed uncompleted knowledge.
And knowledge, which results from a distinct apprehension of the
relevant logical relations, may be termed knowledge proper.

8.

In this way, therefore, I distinguish between direct and
indirect knowledge, between that part of our rational belief which is
based on direct knowledge and that part which is based on argument.
About what kinds of things we are capable of knowing propositions
directly,
it is not easy to say. About our own existence, our own
sense-data, some logical ideas, and some logical relations, it is usually
agreed that we have direct knowledge. Of the law of gravity, of the
appearance of the other side of the moon, of the cure for phthisis,
of the contents of Bradshaw,
it is usually agreed that we do not
have direct knowledge. But many questions are in doubt. Of which
logical ideas and relations we have direct acquaintance, as to whether
we can ever know directly the existence of other people, and as
to when we are knowing propositions about sense-data directly and
when we are interpreting them—it is not possible to give a clear
answer. Moreover, there is another and peculiar kind of derivative
knowledge—by memory.

At a given moment there is a great deal of our knowledge which
we know neither directly nor by argument—we remember it. We
may remember it as knowledge, but forget how we originally knew
it. What we once knew and now consciously remember, can fairly
be called knowledge. But it is not easy to draw the line between
conscious memory, unconscious memory or habit, and pure instinct
or irrational associations of ideas (acquired or inherited)—the last of

pt. i

A TREATISE ON PROBABILITY

14

which cannot fairly be called knowledge, for unlike the ﬁrst two it did
not even arise (in us at least) out of knowledge. Especially in such
a case as that of what our eyes tell us, it is diﬃcult to distinguish
between the diﬀerent ways in which our beliefs have arisen. We
cannot always tell, therefore, what is remembered knowledge and
what is not knowledge at all; and when knowledge is remembered, we
do not always remember at the same time whether, originally, it was
direct or indirect.

Although it is with knowledge by argument that I shall be mainly
concerned in this book there is one kind of direct knowledge, namely
of secondary propositions, with which I cannot help but be involved.
In the case of every argument, it is only directly that we can know
the secondary proposition which makes the argument itself valid and
rational. When we know something by argument this must be through
direct acquaintance with some logical relation between the conclusion
and the premiss.
In all knowledge, therefore, there is some direct
element; and logic can never be made purely mechanical. All it can
do is so to arrange the reasoning that the logical relations, which have
to be perceived directly, are made explicit and are of a simple kind.
It must be added that the term certainty is sometimes used
in a merely psychological sense to describe a state of mind without
reference to the logical grounds of the belief. With this sense I am not
concerned. It is also used to describe the highest degree of rational
belief; and this is the sense relevant to our present purpose. The
peculiarity of certainty is that knowledge of a secondary proposition
involving certainty, together with knowledge of what stands in this
secondary proposition in the position of evidence, leads to knowledge
of, and not merely about, the corresponding primary proposition.
Knowledge, on the other hand, of a secondary proposition involving
a degree of probability lower than certainty, together with knowledge
of the premiss of the secondary proposition, leads only to a rational
belief of the appropriate degree in the primary proposition. The
knowledge present in this latter case I have called knowledge about

9.

ch. ii

FUNDAMENTAL IDEAS

15

the primary proposition or conclusion of the argument, as distinct
from knowledge of it.

Of probability we can say no more than that it is a lower degree
of rational belief than certainty; and we may say,
if we like, that
it deals with degrees of certainty.∗ Or we may make probability
the more fundamental of the two and regard certainty as a special
case of probability, as being,
the maximum probability.
Speaking somewhat loosely we may say that, if our premisses make
the conclusion certain, then it follows from the premisses; and if they
make it very probable, then it very nearly follows from them.

in fact,

It is sometimes useful to use the term “impossibility” as the
negative correlative of “certainty,” although the former sometimes has
a diﬀerent set of associations. If a is certain, then the contradictory
of a is impossible.
If a knowledge of a makes b certain, then a
knowledge of a makes the contradictory of b impossible. Thus a
proposition is impossible with respect to a given premiss,
if it is
disproved by the premiss; and the relation of impossibility is the
relation of minimum probability.†

10. We have distinguished between rational belief and irrational
belief and also between rational beliefs which are certain in degree
and those which are only probable. Knowledge has been distinguished
according as it is direct or indirect, according as it is of primary or

∗This view has often been taken, e.g., by Bernoulli and,

incidentally, by
Laplace; also by Fries (see Czuber, Entwicklung, p. 12). The view, occasionally
held,
that probability is concerned with degrees of truth, arises out of a
confusion between certainty and truth. Perhaps the Aristotelian doctrine that
future events are neither true nor false arose in this way.

†Necessity and Impossibility, in the senses in which these terms are used in
the theory of Modality, seem to correspond to the relations of Certainty and
Impossibility in the theory of probability, the other modals, which comprise the
intermediate degrees of possibility, corresponding to the intermediate degrees of
probability. Almost up to the end of the seventeenth century the traditional
treatment of modals is,
in fact, a primitive attempt to bring the relations of
probability within the scope of formal logic.

pt. i

A TREATISE ON PROBABILITY

16

secondary propositions, and according as it is of or merely about its
object.

In order that we may have a rational belief in a proposition p
of the degree of certainty, it is necessary that one of two conditions
should be fulﬁlled—(i.) that we know p directly; or (ii.) that we know
a set of propositions h, and also know some secondary proposition q
asserting a certainty-relation between p and h.
In the latter case
h may include secondary as well as primary propositions, but it is
a necessary condition that all the propositions h should be known.
In order that we may have rational belief in p of a lower degree
of probability than certainty, it is necessary that we know a set of
propositions h, and also know some secondary proposition q asserting
a probability-relation between p and h.

In the above account one possibility has been ruled out.

It is
assumed that we cannot have a rational belief in p of a degree less
than certainty except through knowing a secondary proposition of the
prescribed type. Such belief can only arise, that is to say, by means of
the perception of some probability-relation. To employ a common use
of terms (though one inconsistent with the use adopted above), I have
assumed that all direct knowledge is certain. All knowledge, that is
to say, which is obtained in a manner strictly direct by contemplation
of the objects of acquaintance and without any admixture whatever
of argument and the contemplation of the logical bearing of any other
knowledge on this, corresponds to certain rational belief and not to
a merely probable degree of rational belief. It is true that there do
seem to be degrees of knowledge and rational belief, when the source
of the belief is solely in acquaintance, as there are when its source is
in argument. But I think that this appearance arises partly out of the
diﬃculty of distinguishing direct from indirect knowledge, and partly
out of a confusion between probable knowledge and vague knowledge.
I cannot attempt here to analyse the meaning of vague knowledge. It
is certainly not the same thing as knowledge proper, whether certain
or probable, and it does not seem likely that it is susceptible of strict

ch. ii

FUNDAMENTAL IDEAS

17

logical treatment. At any rate I do not know how to deal with it, and
in spite of its importance I will not complicate a diﬃcult subject by
endeavouring to treat adequately the theory of vague knowledge.

I assume then that only true propositions can be known, that the
term “probable knowledge” ought to be replaced by the term “probable
degree of rational belief,” and that a probable degree of rational belief
cannot arise directly but only as the result of an argument, out of
the knowledge, that is to say, of a secondary proposition asserting
some logical probability-relation in which the object of the belief
stands to some known proposition. With arguments, if they exist, the
ultimate premisses of which are known in some other manner than
that described above, such as might be called “probable knowledge,”
my theory is not adequate to deal without modiﬁcation.∗

11.

For

the objects of certain belief which is based on direct
knowledge, as opposed to certain belief arising indirectly, there is a
well-established expression; propositions, in which our rational belief
is both certain and direct, are said to be self-evident.

In conclusion, the relativity of knowledge to the individual
may be brieﬂy touched on. Some part of knowledge—knowledge of
our own existence or of our own sensations—is clearly relative to
individual experience. We cannot speak of knowledge absolutely—
only of the knowledge of a particular person. Other parts of
knowledge—knowledge of the axioms of logic, for example—may seem
more objective. But we must admit, I think, that this too is relative
to the constitution of the human mind, and that the constitution
of the human mind may vary in some degree from man to man.
What is self-evident to me and what I really know, may be only a
probable belief to you, or may form no part of your rational beliefs
at all. And this may be true not only of such things as my existence,
but of some logical axioms also. Some men—indeed it is obviously
the case—may have a greater power of logical intuition than others.

∗I do not mean to imply, however, at any rate at present, that the ultimate

premisses of an argument need always be primary propositions.

pt. i

A TREATISE ON PROBABILITY

18

Further, the diﬀerence between some kinds of propositions over which
human intuition seems to have power, and some over which it has
none, may depend wholly upon the constitution of our minds and
have no signiﬁcance for a perfectly objective logic. We can no
more assume that all true secondary propositions are or ought to be
universally known than that all true primary propositions are known.
The perceptions of some relations of probability may be outside the
powers of some or all of us.

What we know and what probability we can attribute to our
rational beliefs is, therefore, subjective in the sense of being relative to
the individual. But given the body of premisses which our subjective
powers and circumstances supply to us, and given the kinds of logical
relations, upon which arguments can be based and which we have
the capacity to perceive, the conclusions, which it is rational for us
to draw, stand to these premisses in an objective and wholly logical
relation. Our logic is concerned with drawing conclusions by a series
of steps of certain speciﬁed kinds from a limited body of premisses.

With these brief indications as to the relation of Probability, as I
understand it, to the Theory of Knowledge, I pass from problems of
ultimate analysis and deﬁnition, which are not the primary subject
matter of this book, to the logical theory and superstructure, which
occupies an intermediate position between the ultimate problems
and the applications of the theory, whether such applications take a
generalised mathematical form or a concrete and particular one. For
this purpose it would only encumber the exposition, without adding
to its clearness or its accuracy,
if I were to employ the perfectly
exact terminology and minute reﬁnements of language, which are
necessary for the avoidance of error in very fundamental enquiries.
While taking pains, therefore, to avoid any divergence between the
substance of this chapter and of those which succeed it, and to employ
only such periphrases as could be translated, if desired, into perfectly
exact language, I shall not cut myself oﬀ from the convenient, but
looser, expressions, which have been habitually employed by previous

ch. ii

FUNDAMENTAL IDEAS

19

writers and have the advantage of being, in a general way at least,
immediately intelligible to the reader.∗

statement,

∗This question, which faces all contemporary writers on logical and
philosophical subjects,
is in my opinion much more a question of style—and
therefore to be settled on the same sort of considerations as other such
questions—than is generally supposed. There are occasions for very exact
methods of
such as are employed in Mr. Russell’s Principia
Mathematica. But there are advantages also in writing the English of Hume.
Mr. Moore has developed in Principia Ethica an intermediate style which in his
hands has force and beauty. But those writers, who strain after exaggerated
precision without going the whole hog with Mr. Russell, are sometimes merely
pedantic. They lose the reader’s attention, and the repetitious complication
of their phrases eludes his comprehension, without their really attaining, to
compensate, a complete precision. Confusion of thought is not always best
avoided by technical and unaccustomed expressions, to which the mind has no
immediate reaction of understanding;
it is possible, under cover of a careful
formalism, to make statements, which, if expressed in plain language, the mind
would immediately repudiate. There is much to be said, therefore, in favour of
understanding the substance of what you are saying all the time, and of never
reducing the substantives of your argument to the mental status of an x or y.

CHAPTER III

1.

the measurement of probabilities
I have spoken of probability as being concerned with
degrees of rational belief. This phrase implies that it is in some
sense quantitative and perhaps capable of measurement. The theory
of probable arguments must be much occupied,
therefore, with
comparisons of the respective weights which attach to diﬀerent
arguments. With this question we will now concern ourselves.

It has been assumed hitherto as a matter of course that probability
is, in the full and literal sense of the word, measurable. I shall have
to limit, not extend, the popular doctrine. But, keeping my own
theories in the background for the moment, I will begin by discussing
some existing opinions on the subject.

2.

It has been sometimes supposed that a numerical comparison
between the degrees of any pair of probabilities is not only conceivable
but is actually within our power. Bentham,
in his
Rationale of Judicial Evidence,∗ proposed a scale on which witnesses
might mark the degree of their certainty; and others have suggested
seriously a ‘barometer of probability.’†

for instance,

That such comparison is theoretically possible, whether or not we
are actually competent in every case to make the comparison, has
been the generally accepted opinion. The following quotation‡ puts
this point of view very well:

∗Book i. chap vi. (referred to by Venn).
†The reader may be reminded of Gibbon’s proposal that:—“A Theological
(Baronius) and our
Barometer might be formed, of which the Cardinal
countryman, Dr. Middleton,
the opposite and remote
extremities, as the former sunk to the lowest degree of credulity, which was
compatible with learning, and the latter rose to the highest pitch of scepticism,
in any wise consistent with Religion.”

should constitute

‡W. F. Donkin, Phil. Mag., 1851. He is replying to an article by J. D.

Forbes (Phil. Mag., Aug. 1849) which had cast doubt upon this opinion.

20

ch. iii

FUNDAMENTAL IDEAS

21

“I do not see on what ground it can be doubted that every deﬁnite
state of belief concerning a proposed hypothesis is in itself capable
of being represented by a numerical expression, however diﬃcult or
impracticable it may be to ascertain its actual value.
It would be
very diﬃcult to estimate in numbers the vis viva of all of the particles
of a human body at any instant; but no one doubts that it is
capable of numerical expression. I mention this because I am not sure
that Professor Forbes has distinguished the diﬃculty of ascertaining
numbers in certain cases from a supposed diﬃculty of expression by
means of numbers. The former diﬃculty is real, but merely relative
to our knowledge and skill; the latter, if real, would be absolute and
inherent in the subject-matter, which I conceive is not the case.”

De Morgan held the same opinion on the ground that, wherever we
have diﬀerences of degree, numerical comparison must be theoretically
possible.∗ He assumes, that is to say, that all probabilities can be
placed in an order of magnitude, and argues from this that they
must be measurable. Philosophers, however, who are mathematicians,
would no longer agree that, even if the premiss is sound,
the
conclusion follows from it. Objects can be arranged in an order,
which we can reasonably call one of degree or magnitude, without its
being possible to conceive a system of measurement of the diﬀerences
between the individuals.

This opinion may also have been held by others,

if not by
De Morgan,
in part because of the narrow associations which
Probability has had for them. The Calculus of Probability has
received far more attention than its logic, and mathematicians, under
no compulsion to deal with the whole of the subject, have naturally
conﬁned their attention to those special cases, the existence of which

∗“Whenever the terms greater and less can be applied, there twice, thrice,
etc., can be conceived,
though not perhaps measured by us.”—“Theory of
Probabilities,” Encyclopaedia Metropolitana, p. 395. He is a little more guarded
in his Formal Logic, pp. 174, 175; but arrives at the same conclusion so far as
probability is concerned.

pt. i

A TREATISE ON PROBABILITY

22

3.

4.

will be demonstrated at a later stage, where algebraical representation
is possible. Probability has become associated, therefore, in the minds
of theorists with those problems in which we are presented with a
number of exclusive and exhaustive alternatives of equal probability;
and the principles, which are readily applicable in such circumstances,
have been supposed, without much further enquiry, to possess general
validity.

It is also the case that theories of probability have been
propounded and widely accepted, according to which its numerical
character is necessarily involved in the deﬁnition. It is often said, for
instance, that probability is the ratio of the number of “favourable
cases” to the total number of “cases.”
If this deﬁnition is accurate,
it follows that every probability can be properly represented by a
number and in fact is a number;
for a ratio is not a quantity at
In the case also of deﬁnitions based upon statistical frequency,
all.
there must be by deﬁnition a numerical ratio corresponding to every
probability. These deﬁnitions and the theories based on them will
be discussed in Chapter VIII.; they are connected with fundamental
diﬀerences of opinion with which it is not necessary to burden the
present argument.

If we pass from the opinions of theorists to the experience
it might perhaps be held that a presumption in
of practical men,
favour of the numerical valuation of all probabilities can be based on
the practice of underwriters and the willingness of Lloyd’s to insure
against practically any risk. Underwriters are actually willing,
it
might be urged, to name a numerical measure in every case, and
to back their opinion with money. But this practice shows no more
than that many probabilities are greater or less than some numerical
measure, not that they themselves are numerically deﬁnite.
It is
suﬃcient for the underwriter if the premium he names exceeds the
probable risk. But, apart from this, I doubt whether in extreme
cases the process of thought, through which he goes before naming
a premium, is wholly rational and determinate; or that two equally

ch. iii

FUNDAMENTAL IDEAS

23

intelligent brokers acting on the same evidence would always arrive
at the same result.
In the case, for instance, of insurances eﬀected
before a Budget, the ﬁgures quoted must be partly arbitrary. There
is in them an element of caprice, and the broker’s state of mind,
when he quotes a ﬁgure, is like a bookmaker’s when he names odds.
Whilst he may be able to make sure of a proﬁt, on the principles of
the bookmaker, yet the individual ﬁgures that make up the book are,
within certain limits, arbitrary. He may be almost certain, that is to
say, that there will not be new taxes on more than one of the articles
tea, sugar, and whisky; there may be an opinion abroad, reasonable
or unreasonable, that the likelihood is in the order—whisky, tea,
sugar; and he may, therefore be able to eﬀect insurances for equal
amounts in each at 30 per cent, 40 per cent, and 45 per cent. He
has thus made sure of a proﬁt of 15 per cent, however absurd and
arbitrary his quotations may be. It is not necessary for the success of
underwriting on these lines that the probabilities of these new taxes
it is suﬃcient
are really measurable by the ﬁgures 3
10
that there should be merchants willing to insure at these rates. These
merchants, moreover, may be wise to insure even if the quotations
are partly arbitrary; for they may run the risk of insolvency unless
their possible loss is thus limited. That the transaction is in principle
one of bookmaking is shown by the fact that, if there is a specially
large demand for insurance against one of the possibilities, the rate
rises;—the probability has not changed, but the “book” is in danger
of being upset. A Presidential election in the United States supplies
a more precise example. On August 23, 1912, 60 per cent was quoted
at Lloyd’s to pay a total loss should Dr. Woodrow Wilson be elected,
30 per cent should Mr. Taft be elected, and 20 per cent should
Mr. Roosevelt be elected. A broker, who could eﬀect insurances in
equal amounts against the election of each candidate, would be certain
at these rates of a proﬁt of 10 per cent. Subsequent modiﬁcations of
these terms would largely depend upon the number of applicants for
each kind of policy.
Is it possible to maintain that these ﬁgures in

, and 45
100

;

,

4
10

pt. i

A TREATISE ON PROBABILITY

24

any way represent reasoned numerical estimates of probability?

†I have considerably compressed the original report (Sapwell v. Bass).

In some insurances the arbitrary element seems even greater.
Consider, for instance, the reinsurance rates for the Waratah, a vessel
which disappeared in South African waters. The lapse of time made
rates rise; the departure of ships in search of her made them fall;
some nameless wreckage is found and they rise; it is remembered that
in similar circumstances thirty years ago a vessel ﬂoated, helpless but
not seriously damaged, for two months, and they fall. Can it be
pretended that the ﬁgures which were quoted from day to day—75 per
cent, 83 per cent, 78 per cent—were rationally determinate, or
that the actual ﬁgure was not within wide limits arbitrary and
due to the caprice of individuals? In fact underwriters themselves
distinguish between risks which are properly insurable, either because
their probability can be estimated between comparatively narrow
numerical limits or because it is possible to make a “book” which
covers all possibilities, and other risks which cannot be dealt with
in this way and which cannot form the basis of a regular business
of insurance,—although an occasional gamble may be indulged in. I
believe, therefore, that the practice of underwriters weakens rather
than supports the contention that all probabilities can be measured
and estimated numerically.

Another set of practical men, the lawyers, have been
more subtle in this matter than the philosophers.∗ A distinction,
interesting for our present purpose, between probabilities, which can
be estimated within somewhat narrow limits, and those which cannot,
has arisen in a series of judicial decisions respecting damages. The
following extract† from the Times Law Reports seems to me to deal
∗Leibniz notes the subtle distinctions made by Jurisconsults between degrees
of probability; and in the preface to a work, projected but unﬁnished, which was
to have been entitled Ad stateram juris de gradibus probationum et probabilitatum
he recommends them as models of
logic in contingent questions (Couturat,
Logique de Leibniz, p. 240).

5.

ch. iii

FUNDAMENTAL IDEAS

25

very clearly in a mixture of popular and legal phraseology, with the
logical point at issue:

This was an action brought by a breeder of racehorses to recover
damages for breach of a contract. The contract was that Cyllene,
a racehorse owned by the defendant, should in the season of the
year 1909 serve one of the plaintiﬀ’s brood mares.
In the summer
of 1908 the defendant, without the consent of the plaintiﬀ, sold
Cyllene for £30,000 to go to South America. The plaintiﬀ claimed a
sum equal to the average proﬁt he had made through having a mare
served by Cyllene during the past four years. During those four years
he had had four colts which had sold at £3300. Upon that basis his
loss came to 700 guineas.

Mr. Justice Jelf said that he was desirous, if he properly could,
to ﬁnd some mode of legally making the defendant compensate the
plaintiﬀ; but the question of damages presented formidable and, to his
mind, insuperable diﬃculties. The damages, if any, recoverable here
must be either the estimated loss of proﬁt or else nominal damages.
The estimate could only be based on a succession of contingencies.
Thus it was assumed that (inter alia) Cyllene would be alive and
well at the time of the intended service; that the mare sent would
be well bred and not barren; that she would not slip her foal; and
that the foal would be born alive and healthy. In a case of this kind
he could only rely on the weighing of chances; and the law generally
regarded damages which depended on the weighing of chances as too
remote, and therefore irrecoverable. It was drawing the line between
an estimate of damage based on probabilities, as in “Simpson v.
L. and N.W. Railway Co.” (1, Q.B.D., 274), where Cockburn, C.J.,
said:
“To some extent, no doubt, the damage must be a matter of
speculation, but that is no reason for not awarding any damages at
all,” and a claim for damages of a totally problematical character.
He (Mr. Justice Jelf) thought the present case was well over the
line. Having referred to “Mayne on Damages” (8th ed., p. 70), he
pointed out that in “Watson v. Ambergah Railway Co.” (15, Jur., 448)

pt. i

A TREATISE ON PROBABILITY

26

Patteson, J., seemed to think that the chance of a prize might be
taken into account in estimating the damages for breach of a contract
to send a machine for loading barges by railway too late for a show;
but Erle, J., appeared to think such damage was too remote. In his
Lordship’s view the chance of winning a prize was not of suﬃciently
ascertainable value at the time the contract was made to be within
the contemplation of the parties. Further, in the present case, the
contingencies were far more numerous and uncertain. He would enter
judgment for the plaintiﬀ for nominal damages, which were all he was
entitled to. They would be assessed at 1s.

One other similar case may be quoted in further elucidation of
the same point, and because it also illustrates another point—the
importance of making clear the assumptions relative to which the
probability is calculated. This case∗ arose out of an oﬀer of a Beauty
Prize† by the Daily Express. Out of 6000 photographs submitted, a
number were to be selected and published in the newspaper in the
following manner:

The United Kingdom was to be divided into districts and the
photographs of the selected candidates living in each district were to
be submitted to the readers of the paper in the district, who were to
select by their votes those whom they considered the most beautiful,
and a Mr. Seymour Hicks was then to make an appointment with
the 50 ladies obtaining the greatest number of votes and himself
select 12 of them. The plaintiﬀ, who came out head of one of
the districts, submitted that she had not been given a reasonable
opportunity of keeping an appointment, that she had thereby lost the
value of her chance of one of the 12 prizes, and claimed damages
accordingly. The jury found that the defendant had not taken
reasonable means to give the plaintiﬀ an opportunity of presenting
herself for selection, and assessed the damages, provided they were

∗Chaplin v. Hicks (1911).
†The prize was to be a theatrical engagement and, according to the article,

the probability of subsequent marriage into the peerage.

ch. iii

FUNDAMENTAL IDEAS

27

capable of assessment, at £100, the question of the possibility of
assessment being postponed. This was argued before Mr. Justice
Pickford, and subsequently in the Court of Appeal before Lord
Justices Vaughan Williams, Fletcher Moulton, and Harwell. Two
questions arose—relative to what evidence ought the probability to
be calculated, and was it numerically measurable? Counsel for the
defendant contended that, “if the value of the plaintiﬀ’s chance was
to be considered, it must be the value as it stood at the beginning of
the competition, not as it stood after she had been selected as one of
the 50. As 6000 photographs had been sent in, and there was also
the personal taste of the defendant as ﬁnal arbiter to be considered,
the value of the chance of success was really incalculable.” The ﬁrst
contention that she ought to be considered as one of 6000 not as
one of 50 was plainly preposterous and did not hoodwink the court.
But the other point, the personal taste of the arbiter, presented more
diﬃculty. In estimating the chance, ought the Court to receive and
take account of evidence respecting the arbiter’s preferences in types
of beauty? Mr. Justice Pickford, without illuminating the question,
held that the damages were capable of estimation. Lord Justice
Vaughan Williams in giving judgment in the Court of Appeal argued
as follows:

As he understood it, there were some 50 competitors, and there
were 12 prizes of equal value, so that the average chance of success
was about one in four.
It was then said that the questions which
might arise in the minds of the persons who had to give the decisions
were so numerous that it was impossible to apply the doctrine of
averages. He did not agree. Then it was said that if precision and
certainty were impossible in any case it would be right to describe
the damages as unassessable. He agreed that there might be damages
so unassessable that the doctrine of averages was not possible of
application because the ﬁgures necessary to be applied were not
forthcoming. Several cases were to be found in the reports where it
had been so held, but he denied the proposition that because precision

pt. i

A TREATISE ON PROBABILITY

28

and certainty had not been arrived at, the jury had no function or
duty to determine the damages. . . . He (the Lord Justice) denied that
the mere fact that you could not assess with precision and certainty
relieved a wrongdoer from paying damages for his breach of duty.
He would not lay down that in every case it could be left to the
jury to assess the damages; there were cases where the loss was so
dependent on the mere unrestricted volition of another person that it
was impossible to arrive at any assessable loss from the breach. It was
true that there was no market here; the right to compete was personal
and could not be transferred. He could not admit that a competitor
who found herself one of 50 could have gone into the market and sold
her right to compete. At the same time the jury might reasonably
have asked themselves the question whether, if there was a right to
compete, it could have been transferred, and at what price. Under
these circumstances he thought the matter was one for the jury.

The attitude of the Lord Justice is clear. The plaintiﬀ had
evidently suﬀered damage, and justice required that she should
be compensated.
But it was equally evident, that, relative to
the completest information available and account being taken of
the arbiter’s personal taste, the probability could be by no means
estimated with numerical precision. Further, it was impossible to say
how much weight ought to be attached to the fact that the plaintiﬀ
had been head of her district (there were fewer than 50 districts); yet
it was plain that it made her chance better than the chances of those
of the 50 left in, who were not head of their districts. Let rough
justice be done, therefore. Let the case be simpliﬁed by ignoring some
part of the evidence. The “doctrine of averages” is then applicable, or,
in other words, the plaintiﬀ’s loss may be assessed at twelve-ﬁftieths
of the value of the prize.∗

6.

How does the matter stand, then? Whether or not

∗The jury in assessing the damages at £100, however, cannot have argued
so subtly as this; for the average value of a prize (I have omitted the details
bearing on their value) could not have been fairly estimated so high as £400.

ch. iii

FUNDAMENTAL IDEAS

29

such a thing is theoretically conceivable, no exercise of the practical
judgment is possible, by which a numerical value can actually be
given to the probability of every argument. So far from our being
able to measure them, it is not even clear that we are always able to
place them in an order of magnitude. Nor has any theoretical rule for
their evaluation ever been suggested.

The doubt, in view of these facts, whether any two probabilities
are in every case even theoretically capable of comparison in terms
of numbers, has not, however, received serious consideration. There
seems to me to be exceedingly strong reasons for entertaining the
doubt. Let us examine a few more instances.

7. Consider an induction or a generalisation. It is usually held
that each additional instance increases the generalisation’s probability.
A conclusion, which is based on three experiments in which the
unessential conditions are varied, is more trustworthy than if it were
based on two. But what reason or principle can be adduced for
attributing a numerical measure to the increase?∗

Or, to take another class of instances, we may sometimes have
some reason for supposing that one object belongs to a certain
category if it has points of similarity to other known members of the
category (e.g. if we are considering whether a certain picture should
be ascribed to a certain painter), and the greater the similarity the
greater the probability of our conclusion. But we cannot in these
cases measure the increase; we can say that the presence of certain
∗It is true that Laplace and others (even amongst contemporary writers)
have believed that the probability of an induction is measurable by means of a
formula known as the rule of succession, according to which the probability of
an induction based on n instances is n + 1
. Those who have been convinced
n + 2
by the reasoning employed to establish this rule must be asked to postpone
judgment until
it has been examined in Chapter XXX. But we may point
out here the absurdity of supposing that the odds are 2 to 1 in favour of a
generalisation based on a single instance—a conclusion which this formula would
seem to justify.

pt. i

A TREATISE ON PROBABILITY

30

peculiar marks in a picture increases the probability that the artist
of whom those marks are known to be characteristic painted it, but
we cannot say that the presence of these marks makes it two or three
or any other number of times more probable than it would have been
without them. We can say that one thing is more like a second object
than it is like a third; but there will very seldom be any meaning in
saying that it is twice as like. Probability is, so far as measurement
is concerned, closely analogous to similarity.∗

Or consider the ordinary circumstances of life. We are out for a
walk—what is the probability that we shall reach home alive? Has
this always a numerical measure? If a thunderstorm bursts upon us,
the probability is less than it was before; but is it changed by some
deﬁnite numerical amount? There might, of course, be data which
would make these probabilities numerically comparable; it might be
argued that a knowledge of the statistics of death by lightning would
make such a comparison possible. But if such information is not
included within the knowledge to which the probability is referred, this
fact is not relevant to the probability actually in question and cannot
aﬀect its value.
In some cases, moreover, where general statistics
are available, the numerical probability which might be derived from
them is inapplicable because of the presence of additional knowledge
with regard to the particular case. Gibbon calculated his prospects

∗There are very few writers on probability who have explicitly admitted that
probabilities, though in some sense quantitative, may be incapable of numerical
comparison. Edgeworth, “Philosophy of Chance” (Mind, 1884, p. 225), admitted
that
“there may well be important quantitative, although not numerical,
estimates” of probabilities. Goldschmidt (Wahrscheinlichkeitsrechnung, p. 43)
may also be cited as holding a somewhat similar opinion. He maintains that a
lack of comparability in the grounds often stands in the way of the measurability
of the probable in ordinary usage, and that there are not necessarily good
reasons for measuring the value of one argument against that of another. On
the other hand, a numerical statement for the degree of the probable, although
generally impossible,
is not in itself contradictory to the notion; and of three
statements, relating to the same circumstances, we can well say that one is
more probable than another, and that one is the most probable of the three.

ch. iii

FUNDAMENTAL IDEAS

31

of life from the volumes of vital statistics and the calculations of
actuaries. But if a doctor had been called to his assistance the nice
precision of these calculations would have become useless; Gibbon’s
prospects would have been better or worse than before, but he would
no longer have been able to calculate to within a day or week the
period for which he then possessed an even chance of survival.

In these instances we can, perhaps, arrange the probabilities in
an order of magnitude and assert that the new datum strengthens
or weakens the argument, although there is no basis for an estimate
how much stronger or weaker the new argument is than the old.
But in another class of instances is it even possible to arrange the
probabilities in an order of magnitude, or to say that one is the
greater and the other less?

8.

Consider three sets of experiments, each directed towards
establishing a generalisation. The ﬁrst set is more numerous; in the
second set the irrelevant conditions have been more carefully varied;
in the third case the generalisation in view is wider in scope than in
the others. Which of these generalisations is on such evidence the
most probable? There is, surely, no answer; there is neither equality
nor inequality between them. We cannot always weigh the analogy
against the induction, or the scope of the generalisation against the
bulk of the evidence in support of it. If we have more grounds than
before, comparison is possible; but, if the grounds in the two cases
are quite diﬀerent, even a comparison of more and less,
let alone
numerical measurement, may be impossible.

This leads up to a contention, which I have heard supported, that,
although not all measurements and not all comparisons of probability
are within our power, yet we can say in the case of every argument
whether it is more or less likely than not. Is our expectation of rain,
when we start out for a walk, always more likely than not, or less
likely than not, or as likely as not? I am prepared to argue that
on some occasions none of these alternatives hold, and that it will
be an arbitrary matter to decide for or against the umbrella. If the

pt. i

A TREATISE ON PROBABILITY

32

barometer is high, but the clouds are black, it is not always rational
that one should prevail over the other in our minds, or even that we
should balance them,—though it will be rational to allow caprice to
determine us and to waste no time on the debate.

9. Some cases, therefore, there certainly are in which no rational
basis has been discovered for numerical comparison. It is not the case
here that the method of calculation, prescribed by theory, is beyond
our powers or too laborious for actual application. No method of
calculation, however impracticable, has been suggested. Nor have we
any prima facie indications of the existence of a common unit to
which the magnitudes of all probabilities are naturally referrible. A
degree of probability is not composed of some homogeneous material,
and is not apparently divisible into parts of like character with one
another. An assertion, that the magnitude of a given probability is in
a numerical ratio to the magnitude of every other, seems, therefore,
unless it is based on one of the current deﬁnitions of probability, with
which I shall deal separately in later chapters, to be altogether devoid
of the kind of support, which can usually be supplied in the case of
quantities of which the mensurability is not open to denial. It will be
worth while, however, to pursue the argument a little further.

10. There appear to be four alternatives. Either in some cases
there is no probability at all; or probabilities do not all belong to a
single set of magnitudes measurable in terms of a common unit; or
these measures always exist, but in many cases are, and must remain,
unknown; or probabilities do belong to such a set and their measures
are capable of being determined by us, although we are not always
able so to determine them in practice.

11. Laplace and his followers excluded the ﬁrst two alternatives.
They argued that every conclusion has its place in the numerical
range of probabilities from 0 to 1,
if only we knew it, and they
developed their theory of unknown probabilities.

In dealing with this contention, we must be clear as to what
we mean by saying that a probability is unknown. Do we mean

ch. iii

FUNDAMENTAL IDEAS

33

unknown through lack of skill
in arguing from given evidence, or
unknown through lack of evidence? The ﬁrst is alone admissible,
for new evidence would give us a new probability, not a fuller
knowledge of the old one; we have not discovered the probability
of a statement on given evidence, by determining its probability in
relation to quite diﬀerent evidence. We must not allow the theory
of unknown probabilities to gain plausibility from the second sense.
A relation of probability does not yield us, as a rule, information of
much value, unless it invests the conclusion with a probability which
lies between narrow numerical limits. In ordinary practice, therefore,
we do not always regard ourselves as knowing the probability of a
conclusion, unless we can estimate it numerically. We are apt, that
is to say, to restrict the use of the expression probable to these
numerical examples, and to allege in other cases that the probability
is unknown. We might say, for example, that we do not know, when
we go on a railway journey, the probability of death in a railway
accident, unless we are told the statistics of accidents in former years;
or that we do not know our chances in a lottery, unless we are told the
number of the tickets. But it must be clear upon reﬂection that if we
use the term in this sense,—which is no doubt a perfectly legitimate
sense,—we ought to say that in the case of some arguments a relation
of probability does not exist, and not that it is unknown. For it is
not this probability that we have discovered, when the accession of
new evidence makes it possible to frame a numerical estimate.

Possibly this theory of unknown probabilities may also gain
strength from our practice of estimating arguments, which, as I
maintain, have no numerical value, by reference to those that have.
We frame two ideal arguments, that is to say, in which the general
character of the evidence largely resembles what is actually within our
knowledge, but which is so constituted as to yield a numerical value,
and we judge that the probability of the actual argument lies between
these two. Since our standards, therefore, are referred to numerical
measures in many cases where actual measurement is impossible, and

pt. i

A TREATISE ON PROBABILITY

34

since the probability lies between two numerical measures, we come to
believe that it must also, if only we knew it, possess such a measure
itself.

12. To say, then, that a probability is unknown ought to mean
that it is unknown to us through our lack of skill in arguing from
given evidence. The evidence justiﬁes a certain degree of knowledge,
but the weakness of our reasoning power prevents our knowing what
this degree is. At the best,
in such cases, we only know vaguely
with what degree of probability the premisses invest the conclusion.
That probabilities can be unknown in this sense or known with less
distinctness than the argument justiﬁes,
is clearly the case. We
can through stupidity fail to make any estimate of a probability at
all, just as we may through the same cause estimate a probability
wrongly. As soon as we distinguish between the degree of belief which
it is rational to entertain and the degree of belief actually entertained,
we have in eﬀect admitted that the true probability is not known to
everybody.

But this admission must not be allowed to carry us too far.
Probability is, vide Chapter II. (§ 12), relative in a sense to the
principles of human reason. The degree of probability, which it is
rational for us to entertain, does not presume perfect logical insight,
and is relative in part to the secondary propositions which we in fact
know; and it is not dependent upon whether more perfect logical
insight is or is not conceivable. It is the degree of probability to which
those logical processes lead, of which our minds are capable; or, in the
language of Chapter II., which those secondary propositions justify,
which we in fact know. If we do not take this view of probability, if
we do not limit it in this way and make it, to this extent, relative
to human powers, we are altogether adrift in the unknown; for we
cannot ever know what degree of probability would be justiﬁed by
the perception of logical relations which we are, and must always be,
incapable of comprehending.

13.

Those who have maintained that, where we cannot assign

ch. iii

FUNDAMENTAL IDEAS

35

a numerical probability, this is not because there is none, but simply
because we do not know it, have really meant, I feel sure, that with
some addition to our knowledge a numerical value would be assignable,
that is to say that our conclusions would have a numerical probability
relative to slightly diﬀerent premisses. Unless, therefore, the reader
clings to the opinion that, in every one of the instances I have cited
in the earlier paragraphs of this chapter, it is theoretically possible on
that evidence to assign a numerical value to the probability, we are
left with the ﬁrst two of the alternatives of § 10, which were as follows:
either in some cases there is no probability at all; or probabilities do
not all belong to a single set of magnitudes measurable in terms of a
common unit. It would be diﬃcult to maintain that there is no logical
relation whatever between our premiss and our conclusion in those
cases where we cannot assign a numerical value to the probability;
and if this is so, it is really a question of whether the logical relation
has characteristics, other than mensurability, of a kind to justify us
in calling it a probability-relation. Which of the two we favour is,
therefore, partly a matter of deﬁnition. We might, that is to say,
pick out from probabilities (in the widest sense) a set,
if there is
one, all of which are measurable in terms of a common unit, and call
the members of this set, and them only, probabilities (in the narrow
sense). To restrict the term ‘probability’ in this way would be, I
think, very inconvenient. For it is possible, as I shall show, to ﬁnd
several sets, the members of each of which are measurable in terms
of a unit common to all the members of that set; so that it would be
in some degree arbitrary∗ which we chose. Further, the distinction
between probabilities, which would be thus measurable and those
which would not, is not fundamental.

At any rate I aim here at dealing with probability in its widest
sense, and am averse to conﬁning its scope to a limited type of
argument. If the opinion that not all probabilities can be measured

∗Not altogether;

for it would be natural to select the set to which the

relation of certainty belongs.

pt. i

A TREATISE ON PROBABILITY

36

seems paradoxical, it may be due to this divergence from a usage which
the reader may expect. Common usage, even if it involves, as a rule, a
ﬂavour of numerical measurement, does not consistently exclude those
probabilities which are incapable of it. The confused attempts, which
have been made, to deal with numerically indeterminate probabilities
under the title of unknown probabilities, show how diﬃcult it is
to conﬁne the discussion within the intended limits, if the original
deﬁnition is too narrow.

14.

I maintain, then,

in what follows, that there are some
pairs of probabilities between the members of which no comparison
of magnitude is possible; that we can say, nevertheless, of some pairs
of relations of probability that the one is greater and the other less,
although it is not possible to measure the diﬀerence between them;
and that in a very special type of case, to be dealt with later, a
meaning can be given to a numerical comparison of magnitude.
I
think that the results of observation, of which examples have been
given earlier in this chapter, are consistent with this account.

By saying that not all probabilities are measurable, I mean that
it is not possible to say of every pair of conclusions, about which we
have some knowledge, that the degree of our rational belief in one
bears any numerical relation to the degree of our rational belief in
the other; and by saying that not all probabilities are comparable in
respect of more and less, I mean that it is not always possible to say
that the degree of our rational belief in one conclusion is either equal
to, greater than, or less than the degree of our belief in another.

We must now examine a philosophical theory of the quantitative
properties of probability, which would explain and justify the
conclusions, which reﬂection discovers, if the preceding discussion is
correct, in the practice of ordinary argument. We must bear in mind
that our theory must apply to all probabilities and not to a limited
class only, and that, as we do not adopt a deﬁnition of probability
which presupposes its numerical mensurability, we cannot directly
argue from diﬀerences in degree to a numerical measurement of these

ch. iii

FUNDAMENTAL IDEAS

37

diﬀerences. The problem is subtle and diﬃcult, and the following
solution is, therefore, proposed with hesitation; but I am strongly
convinced that something resembling the conclusion here set forth is
true.

15.

The so-called magnitudes or degrees of knowledge or
probability, in virtue of which one is greater and another less, really
arise out of an order in which it is possible to place them. Certainty,
impossibility, and a probability, which has an intermediate value, for
example, constitute an ordered series in which the probability lies
between certainty and impossibility.
In the same way there may
exist a second probability which lies between certainty and the ﬁrst
probability. When, therefore, we say that one probability is greater
than another, this precisely means that the degree of our rational
belief in the ﬁrst case lies between certainty and the degree of our
rational belief in the second case.

On this theory it is easy to see why comparisons of more and less
are not always possible. They exist between two probabilities, only
when they and certainty all lie on the same ordered series. But if
more than one distinct series of probabilities exist, then it is clear
that only those, which belong to the same series, can be compared.
If the attribute ‘greater’ as applied to one of two terms arises solely
out of the relative order of the terms in a series, then comparisons
of greater and less must always be possible between terms which are
members of the same series, and can never be possible between two
terms which are not members of the same series. Some probabilities
are not comparable in respect of more and less, because there exists
more than one path, so to speak, between proof and disproof, between
certainty and impossibility; and neither of two probabilities, which lie
on independent paths, bears to the other and to certainty the relation
of ‘between’ which is necessary for quantitative comparison.

If we are comparing the probabilities of two arguments, where the
conclusion is the same in both and the evidence of one exceeds the
evidence of the other by the inclusion of some fact which is favourably

pt. i

A TREATISE ON PROBABILITY

38

relevant, in such a case a relation seems clearly to exist between the
two in virtue of which one lies nearer to certainty than the other.
Several types of argument can be instanced in which the existence
of such a relation is equally apparent. But we cannot assume its
presence in every case or in comparing in respect of more and less the
probabilities of every pair of arguments.

16. Analogous instances are by no means rare, in which, by a
convenient looseness, the phraseology of quantity is misapplied in the
same manner as in the case of probability. The simplest example is
that of colour. When we describe the colour of one object as bluer
than that of another, or say that it has more green in it, we do not
mean that there are quantities blue and green of which the object’s
colour possesses more or less; we mean that the colour has a certain
position in an order of colours and that it is nearer some standard
colour than is the colour with which we compare it.

Another example is aﬀorded by the cardinal numbers. We say
that the number three is greater than the number two, but we do
not mean that these numbers are quantities one of which possesses
a greater magnitude than the other. The one is greater than the
other by reason of its position in the order of numbers; it is further
distant from the origin zero. One number is greater than another if
the second number lies between zero and the ﬁrst.

But the closest analogy is that of similarity. When we say of
three objects A, B, and C that B is more like A than C is, we mean,
not that there is any respect in which B is in itself quantitatively
greater than C, but that, if the three objects are placed in an order
of similarity, B is nearer to A than C is. There are also, as in the
case of probability, diﬀerent orders of similarity. For instance, a book
bound in blue morocco is more like a book bound in red morocco
than if it were bound in blue calf; and a book bound in red calf is
more like the book in red morocco than if it were in blue calf. But
there may be no comparison between the degree of similarity which
exists between books bound in red morocco and blue morocco, and

ch. iii

FUNDAMENTAL IDEAS

39

that which exists between books bound in red morocco and red calf.
This illustration deserves special attention, as the analogy between
orders of similarity and probability is so great that its apprehension
will greatly assist that of the ideas I wish to convey. We say that one
argument is more probable than another (i.e. nearer to certainty) in
the same kind of way as we can describe one object as more like than
another to a standard object of comparison.

17.

Nothing has been said up to this point which bears
on the question whether probabilities are ever capable of numerical
comparison. It is true of some types of ordered series that there are
measurable relations of distance between their members as well as
order, and that the relation of one of its members to an ‘origin’ can
be numerically compared with the relation of another member to the
same origin. But the legitimacy of such comparisons must be matter
for special enquiry in each case.

It will not be possible to explain in detail how and in what sense
a meaning can sometimes be given to the numerical measurement
of probabilities until Part II.
is reached. But this chapter will
be more complete if I indicate brieﬂy the conclusions at which we
shall arrive later.
It will be shown that a process of compounding
probabilities can be deﬁned with such properties that it can be
conveniently called a process of addition.
It will sometimes be the
case, therefore, that we can say that one probability C is equal to
the sum of two other probabilities A and B, i.e. C = A + B.
If in
such a case A and B are equal, then we may write this C = 2A
and say that C is double A. Similarly if D = C + A, we may write
D = 3A, and so on. We can attach a meaning, therefore, to the
equation P = n (cid:5) A, where P and A are relations of probability, and
n is a number. The relation of certainty has been commonly taken
as the unit of such conventional measurements. Hence if P represents
certainty, we should say, in ordinary language, that the magnitude
It will be shown also that we can
of the probability A is
deﬁne a process, applicable to probabilities, which has the properties

1
n

.

pt. i

A TREATISE ON PROBABILITY

40

of arithmetical multiplication. Where numerical measurement is
possible, we can in consequence perform algebraical operations of
considerable complexity. The attention, out of proportion to their real
importance, which has been paid, on account of the opportunities of
mathematical manipulation which they aﬀord, to the limited class of
numerical probabilities, seems to be a part explanation of the belief,
which it is the principal object of this chapter to prove erroneous,
that all probabilities must belong to it.

18. We must look, then, at the quantitative characteristics of
probability in the following way. Some sets of probabilities we can
place in an ordered series, in which we can say of any pair that one is
nearer than the other to certainty,—that the argument in one case is
nearer proof than in the other, and that there is more reason for one
conclusion than for the other. But we can only build up these ordered
series in special cases. If we are given two distinct arguments, there
is no general presumption that their two probabilities and certainty
can be placed in an order. The burden of establishing the existence
of such an order lies on us in each separate case. An endeavour
will be made later to explain in a systematic way how and in what
circumstances such orders can be established. The argument for the
theory here proposed will then be strengthened. For the present it
has been shown to be agreeable to common sense to suppose that an
order exists in some cases and not in others.

19.

Some of the principal properties of ordered series of

probabilities are as follows:

(i.) Every probability lies on a path between impossibility
and certainty;
it is always true to say of a degree of
probability, which is not identical either with impossibility
or with certainty, that it lies between them. Thus certainty,
impossibility and any other degree of probability form an
ordered series. This is the same thing as to say that every
argument amounts to proof, or disproof, or occupies an
intermediate position.

ch. iii

FUNDAMENTAL IDEAS

41

(ii.) A path or series, composed of degrees of probability,

is
not in general compact. It is not necessarily true, that is to
say, that any pair of probabilities in the same series have a
probability between them.

(iii.) The same degree of probability can lie on more than one
path (i.e. can belong to more than one series). Hence, if
B lies between A and C, and also lies between A(cid:48) and C(cid:48)
it does not follow that of A and A(cid:48) either lies between the
other and certainty. The fact, that the same probability can
belong to more than one distinct series, has its analogy in
the case of similarity.

(iv.) If ABC forms an ordered series, B lying between A and C,
and BCD forms an ordered series, C lying between B and D,
then ABCD forms an ordered series, B lying between
A and D.

20. The diﬀerent series of probabilities and their mutual relations
can be most easily pictured by means of a diagram. Let us represent
an ordered series by points lying upon a path, all the points on a
given path belonging to the same series.
It follows from (i.) that
the points O and I, representing the relations of impossibility and
certainty, lie on every path, and that all paths lie wholly between
these points. It follows from (iii.) that the same point can lie on more
than one path.
It is possible, therefore, for paths to intersect and
cross. It follows from (iv.) that the probability represented by a given
point is greater than that represented by any other point which can
be reached by passing along a path with a motion constantly towards
the point of impossibility, and less than that represented by any point
which can be reached by moving along a path towards the point of
certainty. As there are independent paths there will be some pairs
of points representing relations of probability such that we cannot
reach one by moving from the other along a path always in the same
direction.

These properties are illustrated in the annexed diagram, O rep-

pt. i

A TREATISE ON PROBABILITY

42

resents impossibility, I certainty, and A a numerically measurable
probability intermediate between O and I; U, V, W, X, Y, Z are non-
numerical probabilities, of which, however, V is less than the numerical
probability A, and is also less
than W, X, and Y. X and Y
are both greater than W, and
greater
than V, but are not
comparable with one another, or
with A.
V and Z are both
less than W, X, and Y, but
are not comparable with one
another; U is not quantitatively
comparable with any of the probabilities V, W, X, Y, Z. Probabilities
which are numerically comparable will all belong to one series, and
the path of this series, which we may call the numerical path or
strand, will be represented by OAI.

21. The chief results which have been reached so far are collected

together below, and expressed with precision:—

(i.) There are amongst degrees of probability or rational belief
various sets, each set composing an ordered series. These
series are ordered by virtue of a relation of ‘between.’ If B is
‘between’ A and C, ABC form a series.

(ii.) There are two degrees of probability O and I between
which all other probabilities lie.
If, that is to say, A is a
probability, OAI form a series. O represents impossibility
and I certainty.

(iii.) If A lies between O and B, we may write this (cid:99)AB, so that
(cid:100)OA and (cid:99)AI are true for all probabilities.
(iv.) If (cid:99)AB, the probability B is said to be greater than the

probability A, and this can be expressed by B > A.

(v.) If the conclusion a bears the relation of probability P
in other words, the hypothesis h
to the premiss h, or if,
invests the conclusion a with probability P, this may be

ch. iii

FUNDAMENTAL IDEAS

43

written aPh. It may also be written a/h = P.

is of fundamental importance.

This latter expression, which proves to be the more useful of
the two for most purposes,
If aPh
and a(cid:48)Ph(cid:48), i.e. if the probability of a relative to h is the same as the
probability of a(cid:48) relative to h(cid:48), this may be written a/h = a(cid:48)/h(cid:48). The
value of the symbol a/h, which represents what is called by other
writers ‘the probability of a,’ lies in the fact that it contains explicit
reference to the data to which the probability relates the conclusion,
and avoids the numerous errors which have arisen out of the omission
of this reference.

CHAPTER IV

the principle of indifference

Absolute.

‘Sure, Sir, this is not very reasonable, to summon my aﬀection

for a lady I know nothing of.’

Sir Anthony. ‘I am sure, Sir, ’tis more unreasonable in you to object to a

lady you know nothing of.’∗

1.

2.

In the last chapter it was assumed that in some cases the
probabilities of two arguments may be equal.
It was also argued
that there are other cases in which one probability is, in some sense,
greater than another. But so far there has been nothing to show
how we are to know when two probabilities are equal or unequal.
The recognition of equality, when it exists, will be dealt with in this
chapter, and the recognition of inequality in the next. An historical
account of the various theories about this problem, which have been
held from time to time, will be given in Chapter VII.

The determination of equality between probabilities has
received hitherto much more attention than the determination of
inequality. This has been due to the stress which has been laid
on the mathematical side of the subject.
In order that numerical
measurement may be possible, we must be given a number of
equally probable alternatives. The discovery of a rule, by which
equiprobability could be established, was, therefore, essential. A
rule, adequate to the purpose, introduced by James Bernoulli, who
was the real founder of mathematical probability,† has been widely
adopted, generally under the title of The Principle of Non-Suﬃcient
Reason, down to the present time. This description is clumsy and
unsatisfactory, and, if it is justiﬁable to break away from tradition, I
prefer to call it The Principle of Indiﬀerence.

∗Quoted by Mr. Bosanquet with reference to the Principle of Non-Suﬃcient

Reason.

†See also Chap. VII.

44

ch. iv

FUNDAMENTAL IDEAS

45

The Principle of Indiﬀerence asserts that if there is no known
reason for predicating of our subject one rather than another of
several alternatives, then relatively to such knowledge the assertions
of each of these alternatives have an equal probability. Thus equal
probabilities must be assigned to each of several arguments, if there
is an absence of positive ground for assigning unequal ones.

This rule, as it stands, may lead to paradoxical and even
contradictory conclusions. I propose to criticise it in detail, and then
to consider whether any valid modiﬁcation of it is discoverable. For
several of the criticisms which follow I am much indebted to Von
Kries’s Die Principien der Wahrscheinlichkeit.∗

3.

If every probability was necessarily either greater than,
equal to, or less than any other, the Principle of Indiﬀerence would
be plausible. For if the evidence aﬀords no ground for attributing
unequal probabilities to the alternative predications, it seems to follow
that they must be equal.
If, on the other hand, there need be
neither equality nor inequality between probabilities, this method of
reasoning fails. Apart, however, from this objection, which is based
on the arguments of Chapter III., the plausibility of the principle will
be most easily shaken by an exhibition of the contradictions which it
involves. These fall under three or four distinct heads. In §§ 4–9 my
criticism will be purely destructive, and I shall not attempt in these
paragraphs to indicate my own way out of the diﬃculties.

4. Consider a proposition, about the subject of which we know
only the meaning, and about the truth of which, as applied to this
subject, we possess no external relevant evidence.
It has been held
that there are here two exhaustive and exclusive alternatives—the
truth of the proposition and the truth of its contradictory—while our
knowledge of the subject aﬀords no ground for preferring one to the
other. Thus if a and ¯a are contradictories, about the subject of which
∗Published in 1886. A brief account of Von Kries’s principal conclusions will
be given on p. 96. A useful summary of his book will be found in a review by
Meinong, published in the Göttingische gelehrte Anzeigen for 1890 (pp. 56–75).

pt. i

A TREATISE ON PROBABILITY

46

2

we have no outside knowledge, it is inferred that the probability of
each is 1
.∗ In the same way the probabilities of two other propositions,
2
. But without
b and c, having the same subject as a, may be each 1
having any evidence bearing on the subject of these propositions we
may know that the predicates are contraries amongst themselves, and,
therefore, exclusive alternatives—a supposition which leads by means
of the same principle to values inconsistent with those just obtained.
If, for instance, having no evidence relevant to the colour of this book,
is the probability of ‘This book is red,’ we
we could conclude that 1
2
could conclude equally that the probability of each of the propositions
. So that we are
‘This book is black’ and ‘This book is blue’ is also 1
2
faced with the impossible case of three exclusive alternatives all as
likely as not. A defender of the Principle of Indiﬀerence might rejoin
that we are assuming knowledge of the proposition:
‘Two diﬀerent
colours cannot be predicated of the same subject at the same time’;
and that, if we know this, it constitutes relevant outside evidence.
But such evidence is about the predicate, not about the subject.

∗Cf. (e.g.) the well-known passage in Jevons’s Principles of Science, vol. i.
2 to the proposition “A Platythliptic
p. 243, in which he assigns the probability 1
Coeﬃcient is positive.”
Jevons points out, by way of proof, that no other
probability could reasonably be given. This, of course, involves the assumption
that every proposition must have some numerical probability. Such a contention
was ﬁrst criticised, so far as I am aware, by Bishop Terrot in the Edin. Phil.
Trans. for 1856. It was deliberately rejected by Boole in his last published work
on probability: “It is a plain consequence,” he says (Edin. Phil. Trans. vol. xxi.
p. 624), “of the logical theory of probabilities, that the state of expectation
which accompanies entire ignorance of an event is properly represented, not by
Jevons’s particular example,
the fraction 1
however, is also open to the objection that we do not even know the meaning
of the subject of the proposition. Would he maintain that there is any sense in
saying that for those who know no Arabic the probability of every statement
expressed in Arabic is even? How far has he been inﬂuenced in the choice
of his example by known characteristics of the predicate ‘positive’? Would he
2 to the proposition ‘A Platythliptic Coeﬃcient
have assigned the probability 1
is a perfect cube’? What about the proposition ‘A Platythliptic Coeﬃcient is
allogeneous’?

2, but by the indeﬁnite form 0
0.”

ch. iv

FUNDAMENTAL IDEAS

47

Thus the defender of the Principle will be driven on, either to conﬁne
it to cases where we know nothing about either the subject or the
predicate, which would be to emasculate it for all practical purposes,
or else to revise and amplify it, which is what we propose to do
ourselves.

The diﬃculty cannot be met by saying that we must know and
take account of the number of possible contraries. For the number of
contraries to any proposition on any evidence is always inﬁnite; ¯ab is
contrary to a for all values of b. The same point can be put in a form
which does not involve contraries or contradictories. For example,
, if h is irrelevant both to a and to b, in the
a/h = 1
2
sense required by the crude Principle of Indiﬀerence.∗ It follows from
If it follows from the
this that, if a is true, b must be true also.
,
absence of positive data that ‘A is a red book’ has a probability of 1
2
and that the probability of ‘A is red’ is also 1
, then we may deduce
that, if A is red, it must certainly be a book.

and ab/h = 1

2

2

We may take it, then, that the probability of a proposition,
about the subject of which we have no extraneous evidence, is not
. Whether or not this conclusion discredits the Principle
necessarily 1
2
of Indiﬀerence, it is important on its own account, and will help later
on to confute some famous conclusions of Laplace’s school.

5. Objection can now be made in a somewhat diﬀerent shape.
Let us suppose as before that there is no positive evidence relating to
the subjects of the propositions under examination which would lead
us to discriminate in any way between certain alternative predicates.
If, to take an example, we have no information whatever as to the
area or population of the countries of the world, a man is as likely
to be an inhabitant of Great Britain as of France, there being no
reason to prefer one alternative to the other.† He is also as likely to

∗a/h stands for ‘the probability of a on hypothesis h.’
†This example raises a diﬃculty similar to that raised by Von Kries’s
example of the meteor. Stumpf has propounded an invalid solution of Von
Kries’s diﬃculty. Against the example proposed here, Stumpf’s solution has less

pt. i

A TREATISE ON PROBABILITY

48

be an inhabitant of Ireland as of France. And on the same principle
he is as likely to be an inhabitant of the British Isles as of France.
And yet these conclusions are plainly inconsistent. For our ﬁrst two
propositions together yield the conclusion that he is twice as likely to
be an inhabitant of the British Isles as of France.

Unless we argue, as I do not think we can, that the knowledge
that the British Isles are composed of Great Britain and Ireland is a
ground for supposing that a man is more likely to inhabit them than
France, there is no way out of the contradiction. It is not plausible to
maintain, when we are considering the relative populations of diﬀerent
areas, that the number of names of subdivisions which are within our
knowledge, is, in the absence of any evidence as to their size, a piece
of relevant evidence.

At any rate, many other similar examples could be invented, which
would require a special explanation in each case; for the above is an
instance of a perfectly general diﬃculty. The possible alternatives
may be a, b, c, and d, and there may be no means of discriminating
between them; but equally there may be no means of discriminating
between (a or b), c, and d. This diﬃculty could be made striking in a
variety of ways, but it will be better to criticise the principle further
from a somewhat diﬀerent side.

6.

Consider the speciﬁc volume of a given substance.∗ Let us
suppose that we know the speciﬁc volume to lie between 1 and 3, but
that we have no information as to whereabouts in this interval its
exact value is to be found. The Principle of Indiﬀerence would allow
us to assume that it is as likely to lie between 1 and 2 as between
2 and 3; for there is no reason for supposing that it lies in one interval
rather than in the other. But now consider the speciﬁc density. The
speciﬁc density is the reciprocal of the speciﬁc volume, so that if the
. Our data remaining as before, we know
latter is v the former is 1

v

plausibility than against Von Kries’s.

∗This example is taken from Von Kries, op. cit. p. 24. Von Kries does not

seem to me to explain correctly how the contradiction arises.

ch. iv

FUNDAMENTAL IDEAS

49

3

2

2

2

2

as between 2
3

and 1
3

3

, the former lies between 1 and 1 1
3
, the former lies between 1 1
and 1
3

that the speciﬁc density must lie between 1 and 1
, and, by the same
use of the Principle of Indiﬀerence as before, that it is as likely to
. But the speciﬁc volume
be between 1 and 2
being a determinate function of the speciﬁc density, if the latter lies
, and if the latter
between 1 and 2
lies between 2
It follows,
and 3.
3
therefore, that the speciﬁc volume is as likely to lie between 1 and 1 1
as between 1 1
and 3; whereas we have already proved, relatively to
precisely the same data, that it is as likely to lie between 1 and 2
as between 2 and 3. Moreover, any other function of the speciﬁc
volume would have suited our purpose equally well, and by a suitable
choice of this function we might have proved in a similar manner
that any division whatever of the interval 1 to 3 yields sub-intervals
of equal probability. Speciﬁc volume and speciﬁc density are simply
alternative methods of measuring the same objective quantity; and
there are many methods which might be adopted, each yielding on
the application of the Principle of Indiﬀerence a diﬀerent probability
for a given objective variation in the quantity.∗

∗A. Nitsche (“Die Dimensionen der Wahrscheinlichkeit und die Evidenz der
Ungewissheit,” Vierteljahrsschr. f. wissensch. Philos. vol. xvi. p. 29, 1892), in
criticising Von Kries, argues that the alternatives to which the principle must
be applied are the smallest physically distinguishable intervals, and that the
probability of the speciﬁc volume’s lying within a certain range of values turns
on the number of such distinguishable intervals in the range. This procedure
might conceivably provide the correct method of computation, but it does not
therefore restore the credit of the Principle of Indiﬀerence. For it is argued,
not that the results of applying the principle are always wrong, but that it
does not lead unambiguously to the correct procedure. If we do not know the
number of distinguishable intervals we have no reason for supposing that the
speciﬁc volume lies between 1 and 2 rather than 2 and 3, and the principle can
therefore be applied as it has been applied above. And even if we do know
the number and reckon intervals as equal which contain an equal number of
‘physically distinguishable’ parts, is it certain that this does not simply provide
us with a new system of measurement, which has the same conventional basis
as the methods of speciﬁc volume and speciﬁc density, and is no more the one

pt. i

A TREATISE ON PROBABILITY

50

The arbitrary nature of particular methods of measurement of
this and of many other physical quantities is easily explained.
The objective quality measured may not, strictly speaking, possess
numerical quantitativeness, although it has the properties necessary
for measurement by means of correlation with numbers. The values
which it can assume may be capable of being ranged in an order,
and it will sometimes happen that the series which is thus formed
is continuous, so that a value can always be found whose order in
the series is between any two selected values; but it does not follow
from this that there is any meaning in the assertion that one value
is twice another value. The relations of continuous order can exist
between the terms of a series of values, without the relations of
numerical quantitativeness necessarily existing also, and in such cases
we can adopt a largely arbitrary measure of the successive terms,
which yields results which may be satisfactory for many purposes,
those, for instance, of mathematical physics, though not for those of
probability. This method is to select some other series of quantities
or numbers, each of the terms of which corresponds in order to one
and only one of the terms of the series which we wish to measure.
For instance, the series of characteristics, diﬀering in degree, which
are measured by speciﬁc volume, have this relation to the series
of numerical ratios between the volumes of equal masses of the
substances, the speciﬁc volumes of which are in question, and of
water. They have it also to the corresponding ratios which give rise
to the measure of speciﬁc density. But these only yield conventional
measurements, and the numbers with which we correlate the terms
which we wish to measure can be selected in a variety of ways.
It
follows that equal intervals between the numbers which represent the
ratios do not necessarily correspond to equal intervals between the
qualities under measurement; for these numerical diﬀerences depend

correct measure than these are?

ch. iv

FUNDAMENTAL IDEAS

51

upon which convention of measurement we have selected.

7.

A somewhat analogous diﬃculty arises in connection with
the problems of what is known as ‘geometrical’ or ‘local’ probability.∗
In these problems we are concerned with the position of a point or
inﬁnitesimal area or volume within a continuum.† The number of
cases here is indeﬁnite, but the Principle of Indiﬀerence has been
held to justify the supposition that equal lengths or areas or volumes
of the continuum are,
in the absence of discriminating evidence,
equally likely to contain the point.
It has long been known that
this assumption leads in numerous cases to contradictory conclusions.
If, for instance, two points A and A(cid:48) are taken at random on the
surface of a sphere, and we seek the probability that the lesser of the
two arcs of the great circle AA(cid:48) is less than a, we get one result by
assuming that the probability of a point’s lying on a given portion of
the sphere’s surface is proportional to the area of that portion, and
another result by assuming that, if a point lies on a given great circle,
the probability of its lying on a given arc of that circle is proportional
to the length of the arc, each of these assumptions being equally
justiﬁed by the Principle of Indiﬀerence.

Or consider the following problem: if a chord in a circle is drawn
at random, what is the probability that it will be less than the side
of the inscribed equilateral triangle. One can argue:—

∗The best accounts of this subject are to be found in Czuber, Geometrische
Wahrscheinlichkeiten und Mittelwerte; Czuber, Wahrscheinlichkeitsrechnung,
vol. i. pp. 75–109; Crofton, Encycl. Brit. (9th edit.), article ‘Probability’; Borel,
Eléments de la théorie des probabilités, chaps. vi.–viii.; a few other references
are given in the following pages, and a number of discussions of
individual
problems will be found in the mathematical volumes of the Educational Times.
The interest of the subject is primarily mathematical, and no discussion of its
principal problems will be attempted here.

†As Czuber points out (Wahrscheinlichkeiterechnung, vol.

i. p. 84), all
problems, whether geometrical or arithmetical, which deal with a continuum
and with non-enumerable aggregates, are commonly discussed under the name
of ‘geometrical probability.’ See also Lämmel, Untersuchungen.

pt. i

A TREATISE ON PROBABILITY

52

(a) It is indiﬀerent at what point one end of the chord lies. If
we suppose this end ﬁxed, the direction is then chosen at
random. In this case the answer is easily shown to be 2
3

(b) It is indiﬀerent in what direction we suppose the chord
to lie. Beginning with this apparently not less justiﬁable
assumption, we ﬁnd that the answer is 1
2

(c) To choose a chord at random, one must choose its middle
point at random. If the chord is to be less than the side of
the inscribed equilateral triangle, the middle point must be
at a greater distance from the centre than half the radius.
of the
But the area at a greater distance than this is 3
4
whole. Hence our answer is 3
4

.∗

.

.

In general, if x and f (x) are both continuous variables, varying
always in the same or in the opposite sense, and x must lie between
a and b, then the probability that x lies between c and d, where
a < c < d < b, seems to be d − c
, and the probability that f (x) lies
b − a
between f (c) and f (d) to be f (d) − f (c)
. These expressions, which
f (b) − f (a)
represent the probabilities of necessarily concordant conclusions, are
not, as they ought to be, equal.†

8. More than one attempt has been made to separate the cases
in which the Principle of Indiﬀerence can be legitimately applied to
examples of geometrical probability from those in which it cannot.
M. Borel argues that the mathematician can deﬁne the geometrical
probability that a point M lies on a certain segment PQ of AD as
proportional to the length of the segment, but that this deﬁnition is
conventional until its consequences have been conﬁrmed à posteriori
by their conformity with the results of empirical observation. He
points out that in actual cases there are generally some considerations
present which lead us to prefer one of the possible assumptions to the

∗Bertrand, Calcul des probabilités, p. 5.
†See (e.g.) Borel, Éléments de la théorie des probabilités, p. 85.

ch. iv

FUNDAMENTAL IDEAS

53

others. Whether or not this is so, the proposed procedure amounts to
an abandonment of the Principle of Indiﬀerence as a valid criterion,
and leaves our choice undetermined when further evidence is not
forthcoming.

M. Poincaré, who also held that judgments of equiprobability in
such cases depend upon a ‘convention,’ endeavoured to minimise the
importance of the arbitrary element by showing that, under certain
conditions, the result is independent of the particular convention
which is chosen. Instead of assuming that the point is equally likely to
lie in every inﬁnitesimal interval dx we may represent the probability
of its lying in this interval by the function φ(x) dx. M. Poincaré
showed that,
for instance, where
we have a number of compartments arranged in a circle coloured
alternately black and white, if we can assume that φ(x) is a regular
function, continuous and with continuous diﬀerential coeﬃcients, then,
whatever the particular form of the function, the probability of black
is approximately equal to that of white.∗

in the game of rouge et noir,

Whether or not investigations on these lines prove to have a
practical value, they have not, I think, any theoretical importance.
If, as I maintain, the probability φ(x) is not necessarily numerical,
it is not a generally justiﬁable assumption to take its continuity
for granted. We have, in the particular example quoted, a number
of alternatives, half of which lead to black and half to white; the
assumption of continuity amounts to the assumption that for every
white alternative there is a black alternative whose probability is very
nearly equal to that of the white. Naturally in such a case we can
get an approximately equal probability for the whites as a whole and
for the blacks as a whole, without assuming equal probability for
each alternative individually. But this fact has no bearing on the
theoretical diﬃculties which we are discussing.

M. Bertrand is so much impressed by the contradictions of

∗Poincaré, Calcul des probabilités, pp. 126 et seq.

pt. i

A TREATISE ON PROBABILITY

54

9.

geometrical probability that he wishes to exclude all examples in
which the number of alternatives is inﬁnite.∗ It will be argued in the
sequel that something resembling this is true. The discussion of this
question will be resumed in §§ 21–25.

There is yet another group of cases, distinct in character
from those considered so far, in which the principle does not seem to
provide us with unambiguous guidance. The typical example is that
of an urn containing black and white balls in an unknown proportion.†
The Principle of Indiﬀerence can be claimed to support the most
usual hypothesis, namely, that all possible numerical ratios of black
and white are equally probable. But we might equally well assume
that all possible constitutions‡ of the system of balls are equally
probable, so that each individual ball is assumed equally likely to
be black or white. It would follow from this that an approximately
equal number of black and white balls is more probable than a large
excess of one colour. On this hypothesis, moreover, the drawing of
one ball and the resulting knowledge of its colour leaves unaltered the
probabilities of the various possible constitutions of the rest of the
bag; whereas on the ﬁrst hypothesis knowledge of the colour of one
ball, drawn and not replaced, manifestly alters the probability of the
colour of the next ball to be drawn. Either of these hypotheses seems

∗Bertrand, Calcul des probabilités, p. 4:

“L’inﬁni n’est pas un nombre; on
ne doit pas, sans explication, l’introduire dans les raisonnements. La précision
illusoire des mots pourrait faire naitre des contradictions. Choisir au hasard,
entre un nombre inﬁni de cas possibles, n’est pas une indication suﬃsante.”

†The diﬃculty in question was ﬁrst pointed out by Boole, Laws of Thought,
pp. 369–370. After discussing the Law of Succession, Boole proceeds to show
that “there are other hypotheses, as strictly involving the principle of the ‘equal
distribution of knowledge or ignorance’ which would also conduct to conﬂicting
results.” See also Von Kries, op. cit. pp. 31–34, 59, and Stumpf, Über den Begriﬀ
der mathematischen Wahrscheinlichkeit, Bavarian Academy, 1892, pp. 64–68.

‡If A and B are two balls, A white, B black, and A black, B white, are
diﬀerent ‘constitutions.’ But if we consider diﬀerent numerical ratios, these two
cases are indistinguishable, and count as one only.

ch. iv

FUNDAMENTAL IDEAS

55

to satisfy the Principle of Indiﬀerence, and a believer in the absolute
validity of the principle will doubtless adopt that one which enters
his mind ﬁrst.∗

The same point is very clearly illustrated by an example which
I take from Von Kries. Two cards, chosen from diﬀerent packs, are
placed face downwards on the table; one is taken up and found to be
of a black suit: what is the chance that the other is black also? One
would naturally reply that the chance is even. But this is based on
the supposition, relatively unpopular with writers on the subject, that
every ‘constitution’ is equally probable, i.e. that each individual card
is as likely to be black as red. If we prefer this assumption, we must
relinquish the text-book theory that the drawing of a black ball from
an urn, containing black and white balls in unknown proportions,
aﬀects our knowledge as to the proportion of black and white amongst
the remaining balls.

The alternative—or text-book—theory assumes that there are
three equal possibilities—one of each colour, both black, both red.
If both cards are black, we are twice as likely to turn up a black
card than if only one is black. After we have turned up a black, the
probability that the other is black is, therefore, twice as great as the
probability that it is red. The chance of the second’s being black is
.† The Principle of Indiﬀerence has nothing to say against
therefore 2
3
either solution. Until some further criterion has been proposed we
seem compelled to agree with Poincaré that a preference for either

∗C. S. Peirce in his Theory of Probable Inference (Johns Hopkins Studies in
Logic), pp. 172, 173, argues that the ‘constitution’ hypothesis is alone valid,
on the ground that, of the two hypotheses, only this one is consistent with
itself. I agree with his conclusion, and shall give at the close of the chapter the
fundamental considerations which lead to the rejection of the ‘ratio’ hypothesis.
2.
Stumpf points out that the probability of drawing a white ball is, in any case, 1
This is true; but the probability of a second white clearly depends upon which
of the two hypotheses has been preferred. Nitsche (loc. cit. p. 31) seems to miss
the point of the diﬃculty in the same way.

†This is Poisson’s solution, Recherches, p. 96.

pt. i

A TREATISE ON PROBABILITY

56

hypothesis is wholly arbitrary.

10.

Such, then, are the kinds of result to which an unguarded
use of the Principle of Indiﬀerence may lead us. The diﬃculties, to
which attention has been drawn, have been noticed before; but the
discredit has not been emphatically thrown on the original source
of error. Yet the principle certainly remains as a negative criterion;
two propositions cannot be equally probable, so long as there is any
ground for discriminating between them. The principle is a necessary,
but not, as it seems, a suﬃcient condition.

The enunciation of some suﬃcient rule is certainly essential

if
we are to make any progress in the subject. But the diﬃculty
of discovering a correct principle is considerable. This diﬃculty is
partly responsible, I think, for the doubts which philosophers and
many others have often felt regarding any practical application of the
Calculus. Many candid persons, when confronted with the results of
Probability, feel a strong sense of the uncertainty of the logical basis
upon which it seems to rest.
It is diﬃcult to ﬁnd an intelligible
account of the meaning of ‘probability,’ or of how we are ever to
determine the probability of any particular proposition; and yet
treatises on the subject profess to arrive at complicated results of the
greatest precision and the most profound practical importance.

The incautious methods and exaggerated claims of the school of
Laplace have undoubtedly contributed towards the existence of these
sentiments. But the general scepticism, which I believe to be much
more widely spread than the literature of the subject admits, is more
fundamental.
In this matter Hume need not have felt “aﬀrighted
and confounded with that forelorn solitude,
in which I am placed
in my philosophy,” or have fancied himself “some strange uncouth
monster, who not being able to mingle and unite in society, has
been expell’d all human commerce, and left utterly abandon’d and
disconsolate.” In his views on probability, he stands for the plain man
against the sophisms and ingenuities of “metaphysicians,
logicians,
mathematicians, and even theologians.”

ch. iv

FUNDAMENTAL IDEAS

57

Yet such scepticism goes too far. The judgments of probability,
upon which we depend for almost all our beliefs in matters of
experience, undoubtedly depend on a strong psychological propensity
in us to consider objects in a particular light. But this is no ground
for supposing that they are nothing more than “lively imaginations.”
The same is true of the judgments in virtue of which we assent to
other logical arguments; and yet in such cases we believe that there
may be present some element of objective validity, transcending the
psychological impulsion, with which primarily we are presented. So
also in the case of probability, we may believe that our judgments
can penetrate into the real world, even though their credentials are
subjective.

11. We must now inquire how far it is possible to rehabilitate
the Principle of Indiﬀerence or ﬁnd a substitute for it. There are
several distinct diﬃculties which need attention in a discussion of the
problems raised in the preceding paragraphs. Our ﬁrst object must
be to make the Principle itself more precise by disclosing how far its
application is mechanical and how far it involves an appeal to logical
intuition.

12. Without compromising the objective character of relations of
probability, we must nevertheless admit that there is little likelihood
of our discovering a method of recognising particular probabilities,
without any assistance whatever from intuition or direct judgment.
Inasmuch as it is always assumed that we can sometimes judge directly
that a conclusion follows from a premiss,
it is no great extension
of this assumption to suppose that we can sometimes recognise
that a conclusion partially follows from, or stands in a relation of
probability to, a premiss. Moreover, the failure to explain or deﬁne
‘probability’ in terms of other logical notions, creates a presumption
that particular relations of probability must be, in the ﬁrst instance,
directly recognised as such, and cannot be evolved by rule out of data
which themselves contain no statements of probability.

On the other hand, although we cannot exclude every element

pt. i

A TREATISE ON PROBABILITY

58

of direct judgment, these judgments may be limited and controlled,
perhaps, by logical rules and principles which possess a general
application. While we may possess a faculty of direct recognition of
many relations of probability, as in the case of many other logical
relations, yet some may be much more easily recognisable than others.
The object of a logical system of probability is to enable us to know
the relations, which cannot be easily perceived, by means of other
relations which we can recognise more distinctly—to convert, in fact,
vague knowledge into more distinct knowledge.∗

13.

Let us seek to distinguish between the element of direct
judgment and the element of mechanical rule in the Principle of
Indiﬀerence. The enunciation of this principle, as it is ordinarily
expressed, cloaks, but does not avoid, the former element.
It is in
part a formula and in part an appeal to direct inspection; but in
addition to the obscurity and ambiguity of the formula, the appeal
to intuition is not as explicit as it should be. The principle states
that ‘there must be no known reason for preferring one of a set of
alternatives to any other.’ What does this mean? What are ‘reasons,’
and how are we to know whether they do or do not justify us in
preferring one alternative to another? I do not know any discussion
of Probability in which this question has been so much as asked. If,
for example, we are considering the probability of drawing a black

∗As it is the aim of trigonometry to determine the position of an object,
which is in a sense visible, not by a direct observation of it, but by observing
some other object together with certain relations, so an indirect method of this
kind is the aim of all logical system. If the truth of some propositions, and the
validity of some arguments, could not be recognised directly, we could make no
progress. We may have, moreover, some power of direct recognition where it is
not necessary in our logical system that we should make use of it.
In these
cases the method of logical proof increases the certainty of knowledge, which we
might be able to possess in a more doubtful manner without it. In other cases,
that, for instance, of a complicated mathematical theorem, it enables us to know
propositions to be true, which are altogether beyond the reach of our direct
insight; just as we can often obtain knowledge about the position of a partially
visible or even invisible object by starting with observations of other objects.

ch. iv

FUNDAMENTAL IDEAS

59

ball from an urn containing balls which are black and white, we
assume that the diﬀerence of colour between the balls is not a reason
for preferring either alternative. But how do we know this, unless
by a judgment that, on the evidence in hand, our knowledge of the
colours of the balls is irrelevant to the probability in question? We
know of some respects in which the alternatives diﬀer; but we judge
that a knowledge of these diﬀerences is not relevant. If, on the other
hand, we were taking the balls out of the urn with a magnet, and
knew that the black balls were of iron and the white of tin, we might
regard the fact, that a ball was iron and not tin, as very important
in determining the probability of its being drawn. Before, then, we
can begin to apply the Principle of Indiﬀerence, we must have made a
number of direct judgments to the eﬀect that the probabilities under
consideration are unaﬀected by the inclusion in the evidence of certain
particular details. We have no right to say of any known diﬀerence
between the two alternatives that it is ‘no reason’ for preferring one
of them, unless we have judged that a knowledge of this diﬀerence is
irrelevant to the probability in question.

14. A brief digression is now necessary, in order to introduce some
new terms. There are in general two principal types of probabilities,
the magnitudes of which we seek to compare,—those in which the
evidence is the same and the conclusions diﬀerent, and those in
which the evidence is diﬀerent but the conclusion the same. Other
types of comparison may be required, but these two are by far the
commonest. In the ﬁrst we compare the likelihood of two conclusions
on given evidence; in the second we consider what diﬀerence a change
of evidence makes to the likelihood of a given conclusion. In symbolic
language we may wish to compare x/h with y/h, or x/h with x/h1h.
We may call the ﬁrst type judgments of preference, or, when there is
equality between x/h and y/h, of indiﬀerence; and the second type we
may call judgments of relevance, or, when there is equality between
x/h and x/h1h, of irrelevance.
In the ﬁrst we consider whether or
not x is to be preferred to y on evidence h; in the second we consider

pt. i

A TREATISE ON PROBABILITY

60

whether the addition of h1 to evidence h is relevant to x.

The Principle of Indiﬀerence endeavours to formulate a rule which
will justify judgments of indiﬀerence. But the rule that there must
be no ground for preferring one alternative to another, involves, if it
is to be a guiding rule at all, and not a petitio principii, an appeal to
judgments of irrelevance.

The simplest deﬁnition of Irrelevance is as follows: h1 is irrelevant
to x on evidence h, if the probability of x on evidence hh1 is the
same as its probability on evidence h.∗ But for a reason which will
appear in Chapter VI., a stricter and more complicated deﬁnition, as
follows, is theoretically preferable: h1 is irrelevant to x on evidence h,
if there is no proposition, inferrible from h1h but not from h, such
that its addition to evidence h aﬀects the probability of x.† Any
proposition which is irrelevant in the strict sense is, of course, also
irrelevant in the simpler sense; but if we were to adopt the simpler
deﬁnition, it would sometimes occur that a part of evidence would be
relevant, which taken as a whole was irrelevant. The more elaborate
deﬁnition by avoiding this proves in the sequel more convenient.
If
the condition x/h1h = x/h alone is satisﬁed, we may say that the
evidence h1 is ‘irrelevant as a whole.’‡

It will be convenient to deﬁne also two other phrases. h1 and h2
are independent and complementary parts of the evidence, if between
them they make up h and neither can be inferred from the other. If
x is the conclusion, and h1 and h2 are independent and complementary
parts of the evidence, then h1 is relevant if the addition of it to h2
aﬀects the probability of x.§

∗That is to say, h1 is irrelevant to x/h if x/h1h = x/h.
†That is to say, h1 is irrelevant to x/h,
1h =| x/h.

1/h =| 1, and x/h(cid:48)

1/h1h = 1, h(cid:48)

that h(cid:48)

‡Where no misunderstanding can arise, the qualiﬁcation ‘as a whole’ will be

sometimes omitted.
of h if h1h2 = h, h1/h2 =| 1, and h2/h1 =| 1. Also h1 is relevant if x/h =| x/h2.

§I.e. (in symbolism) h1 and h2 are independent and complementary parts

if there is no propsition h(cid:48)

1 such

ch. iv

FUNDAMENTAL IDEAS

61

Some propositions regarding irrelevance will be proved in Part II.
If ¯h1 is the contradictory of h1 and x/h1h = x/h, then x/¯h1h = x/h.
Thus the contradictory of irrelevant evidence is also irrelevant. Also,
if x/yh = x/h,
it follows that y/xh = y/h. Hence if, on initial
evidence h, y is irrelevant to x, then, on the same initial evidence,
x is irrelevant to y, i.e. if in a given state of knowledge one occurrence
has no bearing on another then equally the second has no bearing on
the ﬁrst.

15.

This distinction enables us to formulate the Principle of
Indiﬀerence at any rate more precisely. There must be no relevant
evidence relating to one alternative, unless there is corresponding
evidence relating to the other; our relevant evidence, that is to say,
must be symmetrical with regard to the alternatives, and must be
applicable to each in the same manner. This is the rule at which
the Principle of Indiﬀerence somewhat obscurely aims. We must ﬁrst
determine what parts of our evidence are relevant on the whole by
a series of judgments of relevance, not easily reduced to rule, of the
type described above.
If this relevant evidence is of the same form
for both alternatives, then the Principle authorises a judgment of
indiﬀerence.

16.

This rule can be expressed more precisely in symbolic
Let us assume,
that the alternative
language.
conclusions are expressible in the forms φ(a) and φ(b), where φ(x) is
a propositional function.∗ The diﬀerence between them, that is to
say, can be represented in terms of a single variable.

to begin with,

The Principle of Indiﬀerence is applicable to the alternatives
φ(a) and φ(b), when the evidence h is so constituted that, if f (a) is
an independent part of h (see § 14) which is relevant to φ(a), and
does not contain any independent parts which are irrelevant to φ(a),
then h includes f (b) also.

The rule can be extended by successive steps to cases in which

∗If φ(a), φ(b), etc., are propositions, and x is a variable, capable of taking

the values a, b, etc, then φ(x) is a propositional function.

pt. i

A TREATISE ON PROBABILITY

62

we have more than one variable. We can,
the necessary
conditions are fulﬁlled,
successively compare the probabilities of
φ(a1a2) and φ(b1a2), and of φ(b1a2) and φ(b1b2) and establish equality
between φ(a1a2) and φ(b1b2).

if

This elucidation is suited to most of the cases to which the
Principle of Indiﬀerence is ordinarily applied. Thus in the favourite
examples in which balls are drawn from urns, we can infer from
our evidence no relevant proposition about white balls, such that we
cannot infer a corresponding proposition about black balls. Most of
the examples, to which the mathematical theory of chances has been
applied, and which depend upon the Principle of Indiﬀerence, can be
arranged, I think, in the forms which the rule requires as formulated
above.
17.

We can now clear up the diﬃculties which arose over
the group of cases dealt with in § 9, the typical example of which
was the problem of the urn containing black and white balls in an
unknown proportion. This more precise enunciation of the Principle
enables us to show that of the two solutions the equiprobability
of each ‘constitution’ is alone legitimate, and the equiprobability of
each numerical ratio erroneous. Let us write the alternative ‘The
proportion of black balls is x’ ≡ φ(x), and the datum ‘There are
n balls in the bag, with regard to none of which it is known whether
they are black or white’ ≡ h. On the ‘ratio’ hypothesis it is argued
that the Principle of Indiﬀerence justiﬁes the judgment of indiﬀerence,
φ(x)/h = φ(y)/h. In order that this may be valid, it must be possible
to state the relevant evidence in the form f (x) f (y). But this is not
, we have relevant knowledge about the
the case. If x = 1
way in which a proportion of black balls of one half can arise, which
is not identical with our knowledge of the way in which a proportion
of one quarter can arise. If there are four balls, A, B, C, D, one half
are black, if A, B or A, C or A, D or B, C or B, D or C, D are black;
and one quarter are black, if A or B or C or D are black. These
propositions are not identical in form, and only by a false judgment

and y = 1

2

4

ch. iv

FUNDAMENTAL IDEAS

63

of irrelevance can we ignore them. On the ‘constitution’ hypothesis,
however, where A, B black and A, C black are treated as distinct
alternatives, this want of symmetry in our relevant evidence cannot
arise.

18. We can also deal with the point which was illustrated by
the diﬃculty raised in § 4. We considered there the probabilities of a
and its contradictory ¯a when there is no external evidence relevant
to either. What exactly do we mean by saying that there is no
relevant evidence? Is the addition of the word external signiﬁcant? If
a represents a particular proposition, we must know something about
it, namely, its meaning. May not the apprehension of its meaning
aﬀord us some relevant evidence? If so, such evidence must not be
excluded. If, then, we say that there is no relevant evidence, we must
mean no evidence beyond what arises from the mere apprehension of
the meaning of the symbol a. If we attach no meaning to the symbol,
it is useless to discuss the value of the probability; for the probability,
which belongs to a proposition as an object of knowledge, not as a
form of words, cannot in such a case exist.

What exactly does the symbol a stand for in the above? Does it
stand for any proposition of which we know no more than that it is
a proposition? Or does it stand for a particular proposition which
we understand but of which we know no more than is involved in
understanding it? In the former case we cannot extend our result
to a proposition of which we know even the meaning; for we should
then know more than that it is a proposition; and in the latter case
we cannot say what the probability of a is as compared with that of
its contradictory, until we know what particular proposition it stands
for; for, as we have seen, the proposition itself may supply relevant
evidence.

This suggests that a source of much confusion may lie in the use
of symbols and the notion of variables in probability. In the logic of
implication, which deals not with probability but with truth, what is
true of a variable must be equally true of all instances of the variable.

pt. i

A TREATISE ON PROBABILITY

64

In Probability, on the other hand, we must be on our guard wherever
a variable occurs. In Implication we may conclude that ψ is true of
anything of which φ is true. In Probability we may conclude no more
than that ψ is probable of anything of which we only know that φ is
true of it.
If x stands for anything of which φ(x) is true, as soon
as we substitute in probability any particular value, whose meaning
we know, for x, the value of the probability may be aﬀected;
for
knowledge, which was irrelevant before, may now become relevant.
Take the following example: Does φ(a)/ψ(a) = φ(b)/ψ(b)? That is to
say, is the probability of φ’s being true of a, given only that ψ is true
of a, equal to the probability of φ’s being true of b, given only that
ψ is true of b? If this simply means that the probability of an object’s
satisfying φ about which nothing is known except that it satisﬁes ψ
is equal to ditto ditto, the equation is an identity. For in this case
φ(a)/ψ(a) means the same as φ(b)/ψ(b), i.e. we know nothing about
x and y except that they satisfy ψ, and there is nothing whatever
by which we can distinguish a from b. But if a and b represent
speciﬁc entities, which we can distinguish, then the equality does not
necessarily hold. If, for instance, φ(x) stands for ‘x is Socrates,’ then
it is plainly false that φ(a)/ψ(a) = φ(b)/ψ(b), where a stands for
Socrates and b does not.

19.

Bearing this danger in mind, we can now give further
precision to the enunciation of the Principle of Indiﬀerence given in
§ 16. Our knowledge of the meaning of a must be taken account
of so far as it is relevant; and the Principle is only satisﬁed if
we have corresponding knowledge about the meaning of b. Thus
φ(a)/h = φ(b)/h may be true for one pair of values a, b, and not true
for another pair of values a(cid:48), b(cid:48).

This makes it possible to explain in part the contradiction
,
discussed in § 4. Even if it were true that the probability of a is 1
when we know nothing except that a is a proposition, it does not
follow that the probability of ‘This book is red’ is 1
, when we know
2
the meanings of ‘book’ and ‘red,’ even if we know no more than this.

2

ch. iv

FUNDAMENTAL IDEAS

65

Knowledge arising directly out of acquaintance with the meaning of
‘red’ may be suﬃcient to enable us to infer that ‘red’ and ‘not-red’
are not satisfactory alternatives to which to apply the Principle of
Indiﬀerence. How this may come about will be discussed in §§ 20, 21.
But the contradictions are not yet really solved; for some of the
diﬃculties discussed in § 4 can arise even when we know no more of a
and b than that they are diﬀerent propositions. In fact, although we
have now stated more clearly than before how the Principle should
be enunciated, it is not yet possible to explain or to avoid all the
contradictions to which it led us in §§ 4 to 7. For this purpose we
must proceed to a further qualiﬁcation.

20. The examples, in which the Principle of Indiﬀerence broke
down, had a great deal
in common. We broke up the ﬁeld of
possibility, as we may term it, into a number of areas by a series of
disjunctive judgments. But the alternative areas were not ultimate.
They were capable of further subdivision into other areas similar in
kind to the former. The paradoxes and contradictions arose, in each
case, when the alternatives, which the Principle of Indiﬀerence treated
as equivalent, actually contained or might contain a diﬀerent or an
indeﬁnite number of more elementary units.

In the type of cases in which the Principle of Indiﬀerence seemed
to permit the assertion that, in the absence of relevant evidence, a
proposition is as likely as its contradictory, its contradictory is not
an ultimate and indivisible alternative (in the sense to be explained
in § 21 below), even if the proposition itself satisﬁes this condition.
For its contradictory can be disjunctively resolved into an indeﬁnite
number of sets of contraries to the proposition. It was out of this that
our diﬃculties ﬁrst arose.
‘This book is not red’ includes amongst
others the alternatives ‘This book is black’ and ‘This book is blue.’
It is not, therefore, an ultimate alternative.

In the same way the contradiction of § 5 arose out of the possibility
of splitting the alternatives ‘He inhabits the British Isles’ into the
sub-alternatives ‘He inhabits Ireland or he inhabits Great Britain.’

pt. i

A TREATISE ON PROBABILITY

66

to 2.’

And in the third type of case, to which the example of speciﬁc volume
and density belongs, the alternative ‘v lies in the interval 1 to 2’ can
be broken up into the sub-alternatives ‘v lies in the interval 1 to 1 1
or 1 1
2
21.

This, then, seems to point the way to the qualiﬁcation of
which we are in search. We must enunciate some formal rule which
will exclude those cases, in which one of the alternatives involved is
itself a disjunction of sub-alternatives of the same form. For this
purpose the following condition is proposed.

2

Let the alternatives, the equiprobability of which we seek to
establish by means of
Indiﬀerence, be φ(a1),
φ(a2) . . . φ(ar),∗ and let the evidence be h. Then it is a necessary
condition for the application of the principle, that these should be,
relatively to the evidence, indivisible alternatives of the form φ(x).
We may deﬁne a divisible alternative in the following manner:

the Principle of

An alternative φ(ar) is divisible if

[φ(ar) ≡ φ(ar(cid:48)) + φ(ar(cid:48)(cid:48))]/h = 1,

(i.)
(ii.) φ(ar(cid:48)) (cid:5) φ(ar(cid:48)(cid:48))/h = 0,
(iii.) φ(ar(cid:48))/h =| 0 and φ(ar(cid:48)(cid:48))/h =| 0

The condition that the sub-alternatives must be of the same form
as the original alternatives, i.e. expressible by means of the same
propositional function φ(x), deserves attention. It might be the case
that the original alternatives had nothing substantial in common; i.e.
φ(x) ≡ (x = x) is the only propositional function common to all of
them, the alternatives being a1, a2, . . . , ar.
In these circumstances
the condition in question cannot be satisﬁed. For the proposition ar
can always be resolved into the disjunction arb + ar
¯b, where b is
If, on the other hand, the
any proposition and ¯b its contradictory.

∗The more complicated cases in which the propositional function, of which
the alternatives are instances, involves more than one variable (see § 16), can be
dealt with in a similar manner mutatis mutandis.

ch. iv

FUNDAMENTAL IDEAS

67

alternatives which we are comparing can be expressed in the forms
φ(a1) and φ(a2), where the function φ(x) is distinct from x,
it is
not necessarily the case that either of these can be resolved into a
disjunctive combination of terms which can be expressed in their turn
in the same form.

Dispensing with symbolism, we can express these conditions
as follows: Our knowledge must not enable us to split up the
alternative φ(ar) into a disjunction of two sub-alternatives, (i.) which
are themselves expressible in the same form φ, (ii.) which are mutually
exclusive, and (iii.) which, on the evidence, are possible.

In short, the Principle of Indiﬀerence is not applicable to a pair
of alternatives, if we know that either of them is capable of being
further split up into a pair of possible but incompatible alternatives
of the same form as the original pair.

22.

This rule commends itself to common sense.

If we know
that the two alternatives are compounded of a diﬀerent number or of
an indeﬁnite number of sub-alternatives which are in other respects
similar, so far as our evidence goes to the original alternatives, then
this is a relevant fact of which we must take account. And as it
aﬀects the two alternatives in diﬀering and unsymmetrical ways, it
breaks down the fundamental condition for the valid application of
the Principle of Indiﬀerence.

Neither this consideration nor that discussed in §§ 18 and 19
substantially modify the Principle of Indiﬀerence as enunciated in
§ 16. They have only served to make explicit what was always
implicit in the Principle, by explaining the manner in which our
knowledge of the form and meaning of the alternatives may be a
relevant part of the evidence. The apparent contradictions arose from
paying attention to what we may term the extraneous evidence only,
to the neglect of such part of the evidence as bore upon the form and
meaning of the alternatives.

23. The application of this result to the examples cited in § 18
is not diﬃcult. It excludes the class of cases in which a proposition

pt. i

A TREATISE ON PROBABILITY

68

and its contradictory constitute the alternatives. For if b is the
proposition and ¯b its contradictory, we cannot ﬁnd a propositional
function φ(x) which will satisfy the necessary conditions.
It deals
also with the type of contradiction which arose in considering the
probability that an individual taken at random was an inhabitant of
a given region. If, on the other hand, the term ‘country’ is so deﬁned
that one country cannot include two countries, then an individual is,
relatively to suitable hypotheses, as likely to be an inhabitant of one
as of another. For the function φ(x), where φ(x) ≡ ‘the individual
is an inhabitant of country x,’ satisﬁes the conditions. And it deals
with the example of ranges of speciﬁc volume and speciﬁc density,
because there is no range which does not contain within itself two
similar ranges. As there are in this case no deﬁnite units by which we
can deﬁne equal ranges, the device, which will be referred to in § 25
for dealing with geometrical probabilities, is not available.

24.

It is worth while to add that the qualiﬁcation of § 21 is fatal
to the practical utility of the Principle of Indiﬀerence in those cases
only in which it is possible to ﬁnd no ultimate alternatives which
satisfy the conditions. For if the original alternatives each comprise
a deﬁnite number of indivisible and indiﬀerent sub-alternatives, we
can compute their probabilities.
It is often the case, however, that
we cannot by any process of ﬁnite subdivision arrive at indivisible
sub-alternatives, or that,
if we can, they are not on the evidence
indiﬀerent. In the examples given above, for instance, where φ(x) ≡ x,
or where x is a part of unspeciﬁed magnitude in a continuum, there
are no indivisible sub-alternatives. The ﬁrst type comprises all cases,
amongst others, in which we weigh the probabilities of a proposition
and its contradictory; and the second includes a great number of
cases in which physical or geometrical quantities are involved.

25. We can now return to the numerous paradoxes which arise
in the study of geometrical probability (see §§ 7, 8). The qualiﬁcation
of § 21 enables us, I think, to discover the source of the confusion.
Our alternatives in these problems relate to certain areas or segments

ch. iv

FUNDAMENTAL IDEAS

69

or arcs, and however small the elements are which we adopt as our
alternatives, they are made up of yet smaller elements which would
also serve as alternatives. Our rule, therefore, is not satisﬁed, and,
as long as we enunciate them in this shape, we cannot employ the
Principle of Indiﬀerence. But it is easy in most cases to discover
another set of alternatives which do satisfy the condition, and which
will often serve our purpose equally well. Suppose, for instance, that
a point lies on a line of length m.l., we may write the alternative
‘the interval of length l on which the point lies is the xth interval
of that length as we move along the line from left to right’ ≡ φ(x);
and the Principle of Indiﬀerence can then be applied safely to the
m alternatives φ(1), φ(2) . . . φ(m), the number m increasing as the
length l of the intervals is diminished. There is no reason why
l should not be of any deﬁnite length however small.

In the problem,

If we deal with the problems of geometrical probability in this
way, we shall avoid the contradictory conclusions, which arise from
confusing together distinct elementary areas.
for
instance, of the chord drawn at random in a circle, which is discussed
in § 7, the chord is regarded, not as a one-dimensional line, but as the
limit of an area, the shape of which is diﬀerent in each of the variant
solutions. In the ﬁrst solution it is the limit of a triangle, the length
of the base of which tends to zero; in the second solution it is the
limit of a quadrilateral, two of the sides of which are parallel and at a
distance apart which tends to zero; and in the third solution the area
is deﬁned by the limiting position of a central section of undeﬁned
shape. These distinct hypotheses lead inevitably to diﬀerent results.
If we were dealing with a strictly linear chord, the Principle of
Indiﬀerence would yield us no result, as we could not enunciate the
alternatives in the required form; and if the chord is an elementary
area, we must know the shape of the area of which it is the limit.
So long as we are careful to enunciate the alternatives in a form
to which the Principle of Indiﬀerence can be applied unambiguously,
we shall be prevented from confusing together distinct problems, and

pt. i

A TREATISE ON PROBABILITY

70

shall be able to reach conclusions in geometrical probability which are
unambiguously valid.

The substance of this explanation can be put in a slightly diﬀerent
way by saying that it is not a matter of
indiﬀerence in these
cases in what manner we proceed to the limit. We must assign
the probabilities before proceeding to the limit, which we can do
unambiguously. But if the problem in hand does not stop at small
ﬁnite lengths, areas, or volumes, and we have to proceed to the
limit, then the ﬁnal result depends upon the shape in which the
body approaches the limit. Mathematicians will recognise an analogy
between this case and the determination of potential at points within
a conductor. Its value depends upon the shape of the area which in
the limit represents the point.

26.

The positive contributions of

to the
this chapter
In the
determination of valid judgments of equiprobability are two.
ﬁrst place we have stated the Principle of Indiﬀerence in a more
accurate form, by displaying its necessary dependence upon judgments
of relevance and so bringing out the hidden element of direct judgment
or intuition, which it has always involved. It has been shown that the
Principle lays down a rule by which direct judgments of relevance and
irrelevance can lead on to judgments of preference and indiﬀerence.
In the second place, some types of consideration, which are in fact
relevant, but which are in danger of being overlooked, have been
brought into prominence. By this means it has been possible to avoid
the various types of doubtful and contradictory conclusions to which
the Principle seemed to lead, so long as we applied it without due
qualiﬁcation.

CHAPTER V

other methods of determining probabilities

1.

limits the scope of the Principle of Indiﬀerence.

The recognition of the fact, that not all probabilities
are numerical,
It
has always been agreed that a numerical measure can actually be
obtained in those cases only in which a reduction to a set of exclusive
and exhaustive equiprobable alternatives is practicable. Our previous
conclusion that numerical measurement is often impossible agrees very
well, therefore, with the argument of the preceding chapter that the
rules, in virtue of which we can assert equiprobability, are somewhat
limited in their ﬁeld of application.

But the recognition of this same fact makes it more necessary to
discuss the principles which will justify comparisons of more and less
between probabilities, where numerical measurement is theoretically,
as well as practically, impossible. We must, for the reasons given in
the preceding chapter, rely in the last resort on direct judgment. The
object of the following rules and principles is to reduce the judgments
of preference and relevance, which we are compelled to make, to a
few relatively simple types.∗

2. We will enquire ﬁrst in what circumstances we can expect a
comparison of more and less to be theoretically possible. I am inclined
to think that this is a matter about which, rather unexpectedly
perhaps, we are able to lay down deﬁnite rules. We are able, I think,
always to compare a pair of probabilities which are

(i.)
of the type ab/h and a/h,
(ii.) of the type a/hh1 and a/h,

or
provided the additional evidence h1 contains only one independent
piece of relevant information.

∗Parts of Chap. XV. are closely connected with the topics of the following

paragraphs, and the discussion which is commenced here is concluded there.

71

pt. i

A TREATISE ON PROBABILITY

72

(i.) The propositions of Part II. will enable us to prove that

ab/h < a/h unless b/ah = 1;

that is to say, the probability of our conclusion is diminished by the
addition to it of something, which on the hypothesis of our argument
cannot be inferred from it. This proposition will be self-evident to
the reader. The rule, that the probability of two propositions jointly
is, in general, less than that of either of them separately, includes the
rule that the attribution of a more specialised concept is less probable
than the attribution of a less specialised concept.

(ii.)

Similarly,

This condition requires a little more explanation.

It
is always greater than, equal
states that the probability a/hh1
to, or less than the probability a/h,
if h1 contains no pair of
complementary and independent parts∗ both relevant to a/h. If h1 is
favourable, a/hh1 > a/h.
if h2 is favourable to a/hh1,
a/hh1h2 > a/hh1. The reverse holds if h1 and h2 are unfavourable.
Thus we can compare a/hh(cid:48) and a/h,
in every case in which the
relevant independent parts of the additional evidence h(cid:48) are either
all favourable, or all unfavourable. In cases in which our additional
evidence is equivocal, part taken by itself being favourable and part
unfavourable, comparison is not necessarily possible.
In ordinary
language we may assert that, according to our rule, the addition to
our evidence of a single fact always has a deﬁnite bearing on our
conclusion. It either leaves its probability unaﬀected and is irrelevant,
or it has a deﬁnitely favourable or unfavourable bearing, being
favourably or unfavourably relevant.
It cannot aﬀect the conclusion
in an indeﬁnite way, which allows no comparison between the two
probabilities. But if the addition of one fact is favourable, and the
addition of a second is unfavourable, it is not necessarily possible to
compare the probability of our original argument with its probability
when it has been modiﬁed by the addition of both the new facts.

∗See Chap. IV. § 14 for the meaning of these terms.

ch. v

FUNDAMENTAL IDEAS

73

Other comparisons are possible by a combination of these two
principles with the Principle of Indiﬀerence. We may ﬁnd,
for
instance, that a/hh1 > a/h, that a/h = b/h, that b/h > b/hh2, and
that, therefore, a/hh1 > b/hh2. We have thus obtained a comparison
between a pair of probabilities, which are not of the types discussed
above, but without the introduction of any fresh principle. We may
denote comparisons of this type by (iii.).

3.

Whether any comparisons are possible which do not fall
within any of the categories (i.), (ii.), or (iii.), I do not feel certain.
We undoubtedly make a number of direct comparisons which do not
seem to be covered by them. We judge it more probable, for instance,
that Caesar invaded Britain than that Romulus founded Rome. But
even in such cases as this, where a reduction into the regular form
is not obvious,
it might prove possible if we could clearly analyse
the real grounds of our judgment. We might argue in this instance
that, whereas Romulus’s founding of Rome rests solely on tradition,
we have in addition evidence of another kind for Caesar’s invasion of
Britain, and that, in so far as our belief in Caesar’s invasion rests on
tradition, we have reasons of a precisely similar kind as for our belief
in Romulus without the additional doubt involved in the maintenance
of a tradition between the times of Romulus and Caesar. By some
such analysis as this our judgment of comparison might be brought
within the above categories.

The process of reaching a judgment of comparison in this way
may be called ‘schematisation.’∗ We take initially an ideal scheme
which falls within the categories of comparison. Let us represent ‘the
historical tradition x has been handed down from a date many years
previous to the time of Caesar’ by ψ1(x); ‘the historical tradition x
has been handed down from the time of Caesar’ by ψ2(x);
‘the
historical tradition x has extra-traditional support’ by ψ3(x); and
the two traditions, the Romulus tradition and the Caesar tradition

∗This phrase is used by Von Kries, op. cit. p. 179, in a somewhat similar

connection.

pt. i

A TREATISE ON PROBABILITY

74

4.

respectively, by a and b. Then if our relevant evidence h were of the
form ψ1(a)ψ2(b)ψ3(b), it is easily seen that the comparison a/h < b/h
could be justiﬁed on the lines laid down above.∗ A further judgment,
that our actual evidence presented no relevant divergence from this
schematic form, would then establish the practical conclusion. As
I am not aware of any plausible judgment of comparison which we
make in common practice, but which is clearly incapable of reduction
to some schematic form, and as I see no logical basis for such a
comparison, I feel justiﬁed in doubting the possibility of comparing
the probabilities of arguments dissimilar in form and incapable of
schematic reduction. But the point must remain very doubtful until
this part of the subject has received a more prolonged consideration.
Category (ii.) is very wide, and evidently covers a great
variety of cases. If we are to establish general principles of argument
and so avoid excessive dependence on direct individual judgments of
relevance, we must discover some new and more particular principles
included within it. Two of these—those of Analogy and of Induction—
are excessively important, and will be the subject of Part III. of
this book. In addition to these a few criteria will be examined and
established in Chapter XIV., §§ 4 and 8 (49.1). We must be content
here (pending the symbolic developments of Part II.) with the two
observations following:

(1) The addition of new† evidence h1 to a doubtful‡ argument a/h
is favourably relevant, if either of the following conditions is fulﬁlled:—
(a) if a/hh1 = 0; (b) if a/hh1 = 1. Divested of symbolism, this merely
amounts to a statement that a piece of evidence is favourable if, in
conjunction with the previous evidence, it is either a necessary or a
suﬃcient condition for the truth of our conclusion.

(2) It might plausibly be supposed that evidence would be

a/ψ2(a) = b/ψ2(b);

a/ψ1(a) = a/h; and b/ψ2(b)ψ3(b) = b/h.

∗For
†h1 is new evidence so long as h1/h =| 1.
‡The argument is doubtful so long as a/h is neither certain nor impossible.

b/ψ2(b) < b/ψ2(b)ψ3(b);

a/ψ1(a) < a/ψ2(a);

ch. v

FUNDAMENTAL IDEAS

75

favourable to favourable
favourable to our conclusion which is
evidence—i.e. that,
if h1 is favourable to x/h and x is favourable
to a/h, h1 is favourable to a/h. Whilst, however, this argument
is frequently employed under conditions, which, if explicitly stated,
would justify it, there are also conditions in which this is not so, so
that it is not necessarily valid. For the very deceptive fallacy involved
in the above supposition, Mr. Johnson has suggested to me the name
of the Fallacy of the Middle Term. The general question—If h1 is
favourable to x/h and x is favourable to a/h, in what conditions is
h1 favourable to a/h?—will be examined in Chapter XIV. §§ 4 and
8 (49.1).
In the meantime, the intuition of the reader towards the
fallacy may be assisted by the following observations, which are due
to Mr. Johnson:

Let x, x(cid:48), x(cid:48)(cid:48) . . . be exclusive and exhaustive alternatives under
datum h. Let h1 and a be concordant in regard to each of these
alternatives:
i.e. any hypothesis which is strengthened by h1 will
strengthen a, and any hypothesis which is weakened by h1 will
weaken a. It is obvious that, if h1 strengthens some of the hypotheses
x, x(cid:48), x(cid:48)(cid:48) . . ., it will weaken others. This fact helps us to see why we
cannot consider the concordance of h1 and a in regard to one single
alternative, but must be able to assert their concordance with regard
to every one of the exclusive and exhaustive alternatives, including
the particular one taken. But a further condition is needed, which (as
we shall show) is obviously satisﬁed in two typical problems at least.
This further condition is that, for each hypothesis x, x(cid:48), x(cid:48)(cid:48) . . .,
it
shall hold that, were this hypothesis known to be true, the knowledge
of h1 would not weaken the probability of a.
shall
strengthen a (independently of knowledge of x, x(cid:48), x(cid:48)(cid:48) . . .); and, in a
sense, they appear to be necessary; for, unless they are satisﬁed, the
dependence of h1 upon a would be (so to speak) accidental as regards
the ‘middle terms,’ (x, x(cid:48), x(cid:48)(cid:48) . . .).
The necessity for reference to all the alternatives x, x(cid:48), x(cid:48)(cid:48) . . . is

These two conditions are suﬃcient

to ensure that h1

pt. i

A TREATISE ON PROBABILITY

76

analogous to the requirement of distribution of the middle term in
ordinary syllogism. Thus, from premises “All P is x, all S is x,” the
conclusion that “S’s are P” does not formally follow; but given “all P
is x and all S is x(cid:48)” it does follow that “no S are P”, where x(cid:48) is any
contrary to x. The two conditions taken together would be analogous
to the argument: all x S is P; all x(cid:48) S is P; all x(cid:48)(cid:48) S is P; . . . therefore
all S is P.

First Typical Problem.—An urn contains an unknown proportion
of diﬀerently coloured balls. A ball is drawn and replaced. Then
x, x(cid:48), x(cid:48)(cid:48) . . . stand for the various possible proportions. Let h1 mean
“a white ball has been drawn”; and let a mean “a white ball will
be again drawn.” Then any hypothesis which is strengthened by h1
will strengthen a; and any hypothesis which is weakened by h1 will
weaken a. Moreover, were any one of these hypotheses known to be
true, the knowledge of h1 would not weaken the probability of a.
Hence, in the absence of deﬁnite knowledge as regards x, x(cid:48), x(cid:48)(cid:48) . . .,
the knowledge of h1 would strengthen the probability of a.
Second Typical Problem.—Let a certain event have taken place;
which may have been x, x(cid:48), x(cid:48)(cid:48) or . . . . Let h1 mean that A reports
so and so; and let a mean that B reports similarly or identically.
The phrase similarly merely indicates that any hypothesis as to the
actual fact, which would be strengthened by A’s report, would be
strengthened by B’s report. Of course, even if the reports were
verbally identical, A’s evidence would not necessarily strengthen the
hypothesis in an equal degree with B’s; because A and B may be
unequally expert or intelligent. Now, in such cases, we may further
aﬃrm (in general), that, were the actual nature of the event known,
the knowledge of A’s report on it would not weaken (though it also
need not strengthen) the probability that B would give a similar
report. Hence, in the absence of such knowledge, the knowledge of h1
would strengthen the probability of a.

5. Before leaving this part of the argument we must emphasise
the part played by direct judgment in the theory here presented.

ch. v

FUNDAMENTAL IDEAS

77

The rules for the determination of equality and inequality between
probabilities all depend upon it at some point. This seems to me
quite unavoidable. But I do not feel that we should regard it as a
weakness. For we have seen that most, and perhaps all, cases can
be determined by the application of general principles to one simple
type of direct judgment. No more is asked of the intuitive power
applied to particular cases than to determine whether a new piece of
evidence tells, on the whole, for or against a given conclusion. The
application of the rules involves no wider assumptions than those of
other branches of logic.

While it is important, in establishing a control of direct judgment
by general principles, not to conceal its presence, yet the fact that
we ultimately depend upon an intuition need not lead us to suppose
that our conclusions have, therefore, no basis in reason, or that they
are as subjective in validity as they are in origin.
It is reasonable
to maintain with the logicians of the Port Royal that we may draw
a conclusion which is truly probable by paying attention to all the
circumstances which accompany the case, and we must admit with
as little concern as possible Hume’s taunt that “when we give the
preference to one set of arguments above another, we do nothing but
decide from our feeling concerning the superiority of their inﬂuence.”

CHAPTER VI

the weight of arguments

1.

The question to be raised in this chapter is somewhat
novel; after much consideration I remain uncertain as to how much
importance to attach to it.
The magnitude of the probability
of an argument,
in the sense discussed in Chapter III., depends
upon a balance between what may be termed the favourable and
the unfavourable evidence; a new piece of evidence which leaves
this balance unchanged, also leaves the probability of the argument
unchanged. But it seems that there may be another respect in which
some kind of quantitative comparison between arguments is possible.
This comparison turns upon a balance, not between the favourable
and the unfavourable evidence, but between the absolute amounts of
relevant knowledge and of relevant ignorance respectively.

As the relevant evidence at our disposal increases, the magnitude
of the probability of the argument may either decrease or increase,
according as the new knowledge strengthens the unfavourable or the
favourable evidence; but something seems to have increased in either
case,—we have a more substantial basis upon which to rest our
conclusion. I express this by saying that an accession of new evidence
increases the weight of an argument. New evidence will sometimes
decrease the probability of an argument, but it will always increase
its ‘weight.’

The measurement of evidential weight presents similar
diﬃculties to those with which we met in the measurement of
probability. Only in a restricted class of cases can we compare the
weights of two arguments in respect of more and less. But this must
always be possible where the conclusion of the two arguments is the
same, and the relevant evidence in the one includes and exceeds the
evidence in the other. If the new evidence is ‘irrelevant,’ in the more
precise of the two senses deﬁned in § 14 of Chapter IV., the weight is

2.

78

ch. vi

FUNDAMENTAL IDEAS

79

left unchanged. If any part of the new evidence is relevant, then the
value is increased.

The reason for our stricter deﬁnition of ‘relevance’ is now apparent.
If we are to be able to treat ‘weight’ and ‘relevance’ as correlative
terms, we must regard evidence as relevant, part of which is
favourable and part unfavourable, even if, taken as a whole, it leaves
the probability unchanged. With this deﬁnition, to say that a new
piece of evidence is ‘relevant’
is the same thing as to say that it
increases the ‘weight’ of the argument.

A proposition cannot be the subject of an argument, unless we
at least attach some meaning to it, and this meaning, even if it
only relates to the form of the proposition, may be relevant in
some arguments relating to it. But there may be no other relevant
evidence; and it is sometimes convenient to term the probability of
such an argument an à priori probability.
In this case the weight
of the argument is at its lowest. Starting, therefore, with minimum
weight, corresponding to à priori probability, the evidential weight of
an argument rises, though its probability may either rise or fall, with
every accession of relevant evidence.

3. Where the conclusions of two arguments are diﬀerent, or
where the evidence for the one does not overlap the evidence for the
other, it will often be impossible to compare their weights, just as
it may be impossible to compare their probabilities. Some rules of
comparison, however, exist, and there seems to be a close, though
not a complete, correspondence between the conditions under which
pairs of arguments are comparable in respect of probability and of
weight respectively. We found that there were three principal types
in which comparison of probability was possible, other comparisons
being based on a combination of these:—

(i.) Those based on the Principle of Indiﬀerence, subject to certain
conditions, and of the form φa/ψa (cid:5) h1 = φb/ψb (cid:5) h2, where h1 and h2
are irrelevant to the arguments.

(ii.)

a/hh1 ≷ a/h, where h1 is a single unit of

information,

pt. i

A TREATISE ON PROBABILITY

80

containing no independent parts which are relevant.

(iii.) ab/h ≤ a/h
Let us represent the evidential weight of the argument, whose
probability is a/h, by V(a/h). Then, corresponding to the above, we
ﬁnd that the following comparisons of weight are possible:—
(i.) V(φa/ψa (cid:5) h1) = V(φb/ψb (cid:5) h2), where h1 and h2 are irrelevant
in the strict sense. Arguments, that is to say, to which the Principle
of Indiﬀerence is applicable, have equal evidential weights.

(ii.) V(a/hh1) > V(a/h), unless h1 is irrelevant,

in which case
V(a/hh1) = V(a/h). The restriction on the composition of h1, which
is necessary in the case of comparisons of magnitude, is not necessary
in the case of weight.

There is, however, no rule for comparisons of weight corresponding
to (iii.) above. It might be thought that V(ab/h) < V(a/h), on the
ground that the more complicated an argument is, relative to given
premisses, the less is its evidential weight. But this is invalid. The
argument ab/h is further oﬀ proof than was the argument a/h; but
it is nearer disproof. For example, if ab/h = 0 and a/h > 0, then
V(ab/h) > V(A/h).
In fact it would seem to be the case that the
weight of the argument a/h is always equal to that of ¯a/h, where ¯a
is the contradictory of a; i.e., V(a/h) = V(¯a/h). For an argument
is always as near proving or disproving a proposition, as it is to
disproving or proving its contradictory.

It may be pointed out that if a/h = b/h,

it does not
necessarily follow that V(a/h) = V(b/h). It has been asserted already
that if the ﬁrst equality follows directly from a single application of
the Principle of Indiﬀerence, the second equality also holds. But the
ﬁrst equality can exist in other cases also.
If, for instance, a and b
are members respectively of diﬀerent sets of three equally probable
exclusive and exhaustive alternatives, then a/h = b/h; but these
arguments may have very diﬀerent weights. If, however, a and b can
each, relatively to h, be inferred from the other, i.e. if a/bh = 1 and
b/ah = 1, then V(a/h) = V(b/h). For in proving or disproving one,

4.

ch. vi

FUNDAMENTAL IDEAS

81

we are necessarily proving or disproving the other.

5.

3

4

Further principles could, no doubt, be arrived at. The above
can be combined to reach results in cases upon which unaided
common sense might feel itself unable to pronounce with conﬁdence.
Suppose, for instance, that we have three exclusive and exhaustive
alternatives, a, b, and c, and that a/h = b/h in virtue of the
then we have V(a/h) = V(b/h) and
Principle of
V(a/h) = V(¯a/h), so that V(b/h) = V(¯a/h).
It is also true, since
¯a/(b + c)h = 1 and (b + c)/¯ah = 1, that V(¯a/h) = V((b + c)/h). Hence
V(b/h) = V((b + c)/h).

Indiﬀerence,

and x/h1 = 3

The preceding paragraphs will have made it clear that the
weighing of the amount of evidence is quite a separate process from
the balancing of the evidence for and against.
In so far, however,
as the question of weight has been discussed at all, attempts have
been made, as a rule, to explain the former in terms of the latter.
, it has sometimes been supposed that
If x/h1h2 = 2
it is more probable that x/h1h2 really is 2
than that x/h1 really
is 3
. According to this view, an increase in the amount of evidence
4
strengthens the probability of the probability, or, as De Morgan
would say, the presumption of the probability. A little reﬂection will
show that such a theory is untenable. For the probability of x on
hypothesis h1 is independent of whether as a matter of fact x is or is
not true, and if we ﬁnd out subsequently that x is true, this does not
make it false to say that on hypothesis h1 the probability of x is 3
.
4
Similarly the fact that x/h1h2 is 2
does not impugn the conclusion
, and unless we have made a mistake in our judgment
that x/h1 is 3
or our calculation on the evidence, the two probabilities are 2
and 3
4
3
respectively.

A second method, by which it might be thought, perhaps,
that the question of weight has been treated,
is the method of
probable error. But while probable error is sometimes connected
with weight, it is primarily concerned with quite a diﬀerent question.
‘Probable error,’
is the name given, rather

it should be explained,

4

6.

3

3

pt. i

A TREATISE ON PROBABILITY

82

inconveniently perhaps,
to an expression which arises when we
consider the probability that a given quantity is measured by one of
a number of diﬀerent magnitudes. Our data may tell us that one of
these magnitudes is the most probable measure of the quantity; but in
some cases it will also tell us how probable each of the other possible
magnitudes of the quantity is.
In such cases we can determine the
probability that the quantity will have a magnitude which does not
diﬀer from the most probable by more than a speciﬁed amount. The
amount, which the diﬀerence between the actual value of the quantity
and its most probable value is as likely as not to exceed,
is the
‘probable error.’ In many practical questions the existence of a small
probable error is of the greatest importance, if our conclusions are to
prove valuable. The probability that the quantity has any particular
magnitude may be very small; but this may matter very little,
if
there is a high probability that it lies within a certain range.

Now it is obvious that the determination of probable error is
intrinsically a diﬀerent problem from the determination of weight.
The method of probable error is simply a summation of a number
of alternative and exclusive probabilities.
If we say that the most
probable magnitude is x and the probable error y, this is a way,
convenient for many purposes, of summing up a number of probable
conclusions regarding a variety of magnitudes other than x which,
on the evidence, the quantity may possess. The connection between
probable error and weight, such as it is, is due to the fact that in
scientiﬁc problems a large probable error is not uncommonly due to
a great lack of evidence, and that as the available evidence increases
there is a tendency for the probable error to diminish. In these cases
the probable error may conceivably be a good practical measure of
the weight.

It is necessary, however, in a theoretical discussion, to point out
that the connection is casual, and only exists in a limited class of
cases. This is easily shown by an example. We may have data
, of x = 7
on which the probability of x = 5 is 1

, of x = 6 is 1

3

4

ch. vi

FUNDAMENTAL IDEAS

83

6

20

,

,

, of x = 8 is 1

, and of x = 9 is 1

. Additional evidence might
is 1
5
show that x must either be 5 or 8 or 9, the probabilities of each
. The evidential weight of the
of these conclusions being 7
16
latter argument is greater than that of the former, but the probable
error, so far from being diminished, has been increased. There is, in
fact, no reason whatever for supposing that the probable error must
necessarily diminish, as the weight of the argument is increased.

4
16

5
16

The typical case, in which there may be a practical connection
between weight and probable error, may be illustrated by the two
cases following of balls drawn from an urn. In each case we require
the probability of drawing a white ball;
in the ﬁrst case we know
that the urn contains black and white in equal proportions; in the
second case the proportion of each colour is unknown, and each ball
It is evident that in either case
is as likely to be black as white.
but that the weight
the probability of drawing a white ball
of the argument in favour of this conclusion is greater in the ﬁrst
case. When we consider the most probable proportion in which balls
will be drawn in the long run,
if after each withdrawal they are
replaced, the question of probable error enters in, and we ﬁnd that
the greater evidential weight of the argument on the ﬁrst hypothesis
is accompanied by the smaller probable error.

is 1
2

This conventionalised example is

typical of many scientiﬁc
problems. The more we know about any phenomenon, the less likely,
as a rule, is our opinion to be modiﬁed by each additional item of
experience. In such problems, therefore, an argument of high weight
concerning some phenomenon is likely to be accompanied by a low
probable error, when the character of a series of similar phenomena
is under consideration.

7. Weight cannot, then, be explained in terms of probability.
An argument of high weight is not ‘more likely to be right’ than
one of low weight; for the probabilities of these arguments only state
relations between premiss and conclusion, and these relations are
stated with equal accuracy in either case. Nor is an argument of

pt. i

A TREATISE ON PROBABILITY

84

high weight one in which the probable error is small;
for a small
probable error only means that magnitudes in the neighbourhood of
the most probable magnitude have a relatively high probability, and
an increase of evidence does not necessarily involve an increase in
these probabilities.

The conclusion, that the ‘weight’ and the ‘probability’ of an
argument are independent properties, may possibly introduce a
diﬃculty into the discussion of the application of probability to
practice.∗ For in deciding on a course of action, it seems plausible
to suppose that we ought to take account of the weight as well as
the probability of diﬀerent expectations. But it is diﬃcult to think of
any clear example of this, and I do not feel sure that the theory of
‘evidential weight’ has much practical signiﬁcance.

Bernoulli’s second maxim, that we must take into account all
the information we have, amounts to an injunction that we should
be guided by the probability of that argument, amongst those of
which we know the premisses, of which the evidential weight is the
greatest. But should not this be re-enforced by a further maxim,
that we ought to make the weight of our arguments as great as
possible by getting all the information we can?† It is diﬃcult to see,
however, to what point the strengthening of an argument’s weight
by increasing the evidence ought to be pushed. We may argue that,
when our knowledge is slight but capable of increase, the course of
action, which will, relative to such knowledge, probably produce the
greatest amount of good, will often consist in the acquisition of more
knowledge. But there clearly comes a point when it is no longer
worth while to spend trouble, before acting,
in the acquisition of
further information, and there is no evident principle by which to
determine how far we ought to carry our maxim of strengthening the

∗See also Chapter XXVI. § 7.
†Cf. Locke, Essay concerning Human Understanding, book ii. chap. xxi. § 67:
“He that judges without informing himself to the utmost that he is capable,
cannot acquit himself of judging amiss.”

ch. vi

FUNDAMENTAL IDEAS

85

8.

9.

weight of our argument. A little reﬂection will probably convince the
reader that this is a very confusing problem.

The fundamental distinction of this chapter may be brieﬂy
repeated. One argument has more weight than another if it is based
upon a greater amount of relevant evidence; but it is not always, or
even generally, possible to say of two sets of propositions that one set
embodies more evidence than the other. It has a greater probability
than another if the balance in its favour, of what evidence there is,
is greater than the balance in favour of the argument with which we
compare it; but it is not always, or even generally, possible to say
that the balance in the one case is greater than the balance in the
other. The weight, to speak metaphorically, measures the sum of the
favourable and unfavourable evidence, the probability measures the
diﬀerence.

The phenomenon of ‘weight’ can be described from the
point of view of other theories of probability than that which is
adopted here.
If we follow certain German logicians in regarding
probability as being based on the disjunctive judgment, we may
say that the weight is increased when the number of alternatives
is reduced, although the ratio of the number of favourable to the
number of unfavourable alternatives may not have been disturbed; or,
to adopt the phraseology of another German school, we may say that
the weight of the probability is increased, as the ﬁeld of possibility is
contracted.

The same distinction may be explained in the language of the
frequency theory.∗ We should then say that the weight is increased
if we are able to employ as the class of reference a class which is
contained in the original class of reference.

10. The subject of this chapter has not usually been discussed by
writers on probability, and I know of only two by whom the question
has been explicitly raised:† Meinong, who threw out a suggestion at

∗See Chap. VIII.
†There are also some remarks by Czuber (Wahrscheinlichkeitsrechnung, vol. i.

pt. i

A TREATISE ON PROBABILITY

86

the conclusion of his review of Von Kries’ “Principien,” published in
the Göttingische gelehrte Anzeigen for 1890 (see especially pp. 70–74),
and A. Nitsche, who took up Meinong’s suggestion in an article in the
Vierteljahrsschrift für wissenschaftliche Philosophie, 1892, vol. xvi.
pp. 20–35, entitled “Die Dimensionen der Wahrscheinlichkeit und die
Evidenz der Ungewissheit.”

Meinong, who does not develop the point in any detail, distin-
guishes probability and weight as ‘Intensität’ and ‘Qualität,’ and is
inclined to regard them as two independent dimensions in which
the judgment is free to move—they are the two dimensions of the
‘Urteils-Continuum.’ Nitsche regards the weight as being the measure
of the reliability (Sicherheit) of the probability, and holds that the
probability continually approximates to its true magnitude (reale
Geltung) as the weight increases. His treatment is too brief for it to
be possible to understand very clearly what he means, but his view
seems to resemble the theory already discussed that an argument of
high weight is ‘more likely to be right’ than one of low weight.

p. 202) on the Erkenninisswert of probabilities obtained by diﬀerent methods,
which may have been intended to have some bearing on it.

CHAPTER VII

historical retrospect

1.

The characteristic features of our Philosophy of Probability
must be determined by the solutions which we oﬀer to the problems
attacked in Chapters III and IV. Whilst a great part of the logical
calculus, which will be developed in Part II., would be applicable
with slight modiﬁcation to several distinct theories of the subject, the
ultimate problems of establishing the premisses of the calculus bring
into the light every fundamental diﬀerence of opinion.

These problems are often, for this reason perhaps, left on one side
by writers whose interest chieﬂy lies in the more formal parts of the
subject. But Probability is not yet on so sound a basis that the formal
or mathematical side of it can be safely developed in isolation, and
some attempts have naturally been made to solve the problem which
Bishop Butler sets to the logician in the concluding words of the brief
discussion on probability with which he prefaces the Analogy.∗

In this chapter, therefore, we will review in their historical order
the answers of Philosophy to the questions, how we know relations
of probability, what ground we have for our judgments, and by what
method we can advance our knowledge.

2. The natural man is disposed to the opinion that probability
is essentially connected with the inductions of experience and, if he
is a little more sophisticated, with the Laws of Causation and of the
Uniformity of Nature. As Aristotle says, “the probable is that which
usually happens.” Events do not always occur in accordance with

∗“It is not my design to inquire further into the nature, the foundation and
measure of probability; or whence it proceeds that likeness should beget that
presumption, opinion and full conviction, which the human mind is formed to
receive from it, and which it does necessarily produce in every one; or to guard
against the errors to which reasoning from analogy is liable. This belongs to the
subject of logic, and is a part of that subject which has not yet been thoroughly
considered.”

87

